14987
DOCUMENTS
A
 
  
  
  
                 alices adventures in wonderland 
  
                           lewis carroll 
  
                the millennium fulcrum edition . 
  
  
  
  
                             chapter i 
  
                       down the rabbithole 
  
  
   alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister 
 on the bank, and of having nothing to do  once or twice she had 
 peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no 
 pictures or conversations in it, and what is the use of a book, 
 thought alice without pictures or conversation 
  
   so she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, 
 for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether 
 the pleasure of making a daisychain would be worth the trouble 
 of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a white 
 rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her. 
  
   there was nothing so very remarkable in that nor did alice 
 think it so very much out of the way to hear the rabbit say to 
 itself, oh dear  oh dear  i shall be late  (when she thought 
 it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have 
 wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural) 
 but when the rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat 
 pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, alice started to 
 her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never 
 before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoatpocket, or a watch to 
 take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the 
 field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop 
 down a large rabbithole under the hedge. 
  
   in another moment down went alice after it, never once 
 considering how in the world she was to get out again. 
  
   the rabbithole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, 
 and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that alice had not a 
 moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself 
 falling down a very deep well. 
  
   either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she 
 had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to 
 wonder what was going to happen next.  first, she tried to look 
 down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to 
 see anything then she looked at the sides of the well, and 
 noticed that they were filled with cupboards and bookshelves 
 here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.  she 
 took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed it was 
 labelled orange marmalade, but to her great disappointment it 
 was empty  she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing 
 somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she 
 fell past it. 
  
   well thought alice to herself, after such a fall as this, i 
 shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs  how brave theyll 
 all think me at home  why, i wouldnt say anything about it, 
 even if i fell off the top of the house (which was very likely 
 true.) 
  
   down, down, down.  would the fall never come to an end  i 
 wonder how many miles ive fallen by this time she said aloud. 
 i must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.  let 
 me see  that would be four thousand miles down, i think (for, 
 you see, alice had learnt several things of this sort in her 
 lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good 
 opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to 
 listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) yes, 
 thats about the right distancebut then i wonder what latitude 
 or longitude ive got to  (alice had no idea what latitude was, 
 or longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to 
 say.) 
  
   presently she began again.  i wonder if i shall fall right 
 through the earth  how funny itll seem to come out among the 
 people that walk with their heads downward  the antipathies, i 
 think (she was rather glad there was no one listening, this 
 time, as it didnt sound at all the right word) but i shall 
 have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know. 
 please, maam, is this new zealand or australia (and she tried 
 to curtsey as she spokefancy curtseying as youre falling 
 through the air  do you think you could manage it)  and what 
 an ignorant little girl shell think me for asking  no, itll 
 never do to ask  perhaps i shall see it written up somewhere. 
  
   down, down, down.  there was nothing else to do, so alice soon 
 began talking again.  dinahll miss me very much tonight, i 
 should think  (dinah was the cat.)  i hope theyll remember 
 her saucer of milk at teatime.  dinah my dear  i wish you were 
 down here with me  there are no mice in the air, im afraid, but 
 you might catch a bat, and thats very like a mouse, you know. 
 but do cats eat bats, i wonder  and here alice began to get 
 rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of 
 way, do cats eat bats  do cats eat bats and sometimes, do 
 bats eat cats for, you see, as she couldnt answer either 
 question, it didnt much matter which way she put it.  she felt 
 that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she 
 was walking hand in hand with dinah, and saying to her very 
 earnestly, now, dinah, tell me the truth  did you ever eat a 
 bat when suddenly, thump thump down she came upon a heap of 
 sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over. 
  
   alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a 
 moment  she looked up, but it was all dark overhead before her 
 was another long passage, and the white rabbit was still in 
 sight, hurrying down it.  there was not a moment to be lost 
 away went alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it 
 say, as it turned a corner, oh my ears and whiskers, how late 
 its getting  she was close behind it when she turned the 
 corner, but the rabbit was no longer to be seen  she found 
 herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps 
 hanging from the roof. 
  
   there were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked 
 and when alice had been all the way down one side and up the 
 other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, 
 wondering how she was ever to get out again. 
  
   suddenly she came upon a little threelegged table, all made of 
 solid glass there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, 
 and alices first thought was that it might belong to one of the 
 doors of the hall but, alas either the locks were too large, or 
 the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of 
 them.  however, on the second time round, she came upon a low 
 curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little 
 door about fifteen inches high  she tried the little golden key 
 in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted 
  
   alice opened the door and found that it led into a small 
 passage, not much larger than a rathole  she knelt down and 
 looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. 
 how she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about 
 among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but 
 she could not even get her head though the doorway and even if 
 my head would go through, thought poor alice, it would be of 
 very little use without my shoulders.  oh, how i wish 
 i could shut up like a telescope  i think i could, if i only 
 know how to begin.  for, you see, so many outoftheway things 
 had happened lately, that alice had begun to think that very few 
 things indeed were really impossible. 
  
   there seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she 
 went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on 
 it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like 
 telescopes  this time she found a little bottle on it, (which 
 certainly was not here before, said alice,) and round the neck 
 of the bottle was a paper label, with the words drink me 
 beautifully printed on it in large letters. 
  
   it was all very well to say drink me, but the wise little 
 alice was not going to do that in a hurry.  no, ill look 
 first, she said, and see whether its marked poison or not 
 for she had read several nice little histories about children who 
 had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant 
 things, all because they would not remember the simple rules 
 their friends had taught them  such as, that a redhot poker 
 will burn you if you hold it too long and that if you cut your 
 finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds and she had 
 never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked 
 poison, it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or 
 later. 
  
   however, this bottle was not marked poison, so alice ventured 
 to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort 
 of mixed flavour of cherrytart, custard, pineapple, roast 
 turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished 
 it off. 
  
                                                 
  
                                              
  
                                                 
  
   what a curious feeling said alice i must be shutting up 
 like a telescope. 
  
   and so it was indeed  she was now only ten inches high, and 
 her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right 
 size for going though the little door into that lovely garden. 
 first, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was 
 going to shrink any further  she felt a little nervous about 
 this for it might end, you know, said alice to herself, in my 
 going out altogether, like a candle.  i wonder what i should be 
 like then  and she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is 
 like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember 
 ever having seen such a thing. 
  
   after a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided 
 on going into the garden at once but, alas for poor alice when 
 she got to the door, she found he had forgotten the little golden 
 key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she 
 could not possibly reach it  she could see it quite plainly 
 through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the 
 legs of the table, but it was too slippery and when she had 
 tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and 
 cried. 
  
   come, theres no use in crying like that said alice to 
 herself, rather sharply i advise you to leave off this minute 
 she generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very 
 seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so 
 severely as to bring tears into her eyes and once she remembered 
 trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game 
 of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious 
 child was very fond of pretending to be two people.  but its no 
 use now, thought poor alice, to pretend to be two people  why, 
 theres hardly enough of me left to make one respectable 
 person 
  
   soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under 
 the table  she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on 
 which the words eat me were beautifully marked in currants. 
 well, ill eat it, said alice, and if it makes me grow larger, 
 i can reach the key and if it makes me grow smaller, i can creep 
 under the door so either way ill get into the garden, and i 
 dont care which happens 
  
   she ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, which 
 way  which way, holding her hand on the top of her head to 
 feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to 
 find that she remained the same size  to be sure, this generally 
 happens when one eats cake, but alice had got so much into the 
 way of expecting nothing but outoftheway things to happen, 
 that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the 
 common way. 
  
   so she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake. 
  
                                                 
  
                                              
  
                                                 
  
  
  
  
                            chapter ii 
  
                         the pool of tears 
  
  
   curiouser and curiouser cried alice (she was so much 
 surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good 
 english) now im opening out like the largest telescope that 
 ever was  goodbye, feet (for when she looked down at her 
 feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so 
 far off).  oh, my poor little feet, i wonder who will put on 
 your shoes and stockings for you now, dears  im sure i shant 
 be able  i shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself 
 about you  you must manage the best way you can but i must be 
 kind to them, thought alice, or perhaps they wont walk the 
 way i want to go  let me see  ill give them a new pair of 
 boots every christmas. 
  
   and she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. 
 they must go by the carrier, she thought and how funny itll 
 seem, sending presents to ones own feet  and how odd the 
 directions will look 
  
             alices right foot, esq. 
                 hearthrug, 
                     near the fender, 
                         (with alices love). 
  
 oh dear, what nonsense im talking 
  
   just then her head struck against the roof of the hall  in 
 fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took 
 up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door. 
  
   poor alice  it was as much as she could do, lying down on one 
 side, to look through into the garden with one eye but to get 
 through was more hopeless than ever  she sat down and began to 
 cry again. 
  
   you ought to be ashamed of yourself, said alice, a great 
 girl like you, (she might well say this), to go on crying in 
 this way  stop this moment, i tell you  but she went on all 
 the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool 
 all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the 
 hall. 
  
   after a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the 
 distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. 
 it was the white rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a 
 pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the 
 other  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to 
 himself as he came, oh the duchess, the duchess oh wont she 
 be savage if ive kept her waiting  alice felt so desperate 
 that she was ready to ask help of any one so, when the rabbit 
 came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, if you please, 
 sir  the rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid 
 gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard 
 as he could go. 
  
   alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very 
 hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking 
 dear, dear  how queer everything is today  and yesterday 
 things went on just as usual.  i wonder if ive been changed in 
 the night  let me think  was i the same when i got up this 
 morning  i almost think i can remember feeling a little 
 different.  but if im not the same, the next question is, who in 
 the world am i  ah, thats the great puzzle  and she began 
 thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age 
 as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of 
 them. 
  
   im sure im not ada, she said, for her hair goes in such 
 long ringlets, and mine doesnt go in ringlets at all and im 
 sure i cant be mabel, for i know all sorts of things, and she, 
 oh she knows such a very little  besides, shes she, and im i, 
 andoh dear, how puzzling it all is  ill try if i know all the 
 things i used to know.  let me see  four times five is twelve, 
 and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven isoh dear 
 i shall never get to twenty at that rate  however, the 
 multiplication table doesnt signify  lets try geography. 
 london is the capital of paris, and paris is the capital of rome, 
 and romeno, thats all wrong, im certain  i must have been 
 changed for mabel  ill try and say how doth the little 
 and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, 
 and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and 
 strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do 
  
             how doth the little crocodile 
               improve his shining tail, 
             and pour the waters of the nile 
               on every golden scale 
  
             how cheerfully he seems to grin, 
               how neatly spread his claws, 
             and welcome little fishes in 
               with gently smiling jaws 
  
   im sure those are not the right words, said poor alice, and 
 her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, i must be mabel 
 after all, and i shall have to go and live in that poky little 
 house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh ever so 
 many lessons to learn  no, ive made up my mind about it if im 
 mabel, ill stay down here  itll be no use their putting their 
 heads down and saying come up again, dear  i shall only look 
 up and say who am i then  tell me that first, and then, if i 
 like being that person, ill come up  if not, ill stay down 
 here till im somebody elsebut, oh dear cried alice, with a 
 sudden burst of tears, i do wish they would put their heads 
 down  i am so very tired of being all alone here 
  
   as she said this she looked down at her hands, and was 
 surprised to see that she had put on one of the rabbits little 
 white kid gloves while she was talking.  how can i have done 
 that she thought.  i must be growing small again.  she got up 
 and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, 
 as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, 
 and was going on shrinking rapidly  she soon found out that the 
 cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it 
 hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether. 
  
 that was a narrow escape said alice, a good deal frightened at 
 the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in 
 existence and now for the garden and she ran with all speed 
 back to the little door  but, alas the little door was shut 
 again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as 
 before, and things are worse than ever, thought the poor child, 
 for i never was so small as this before, never  and i declare 
 its too bad, that it is 
  
   as she said these words her foot slipped, and in another 
 moment, splash she was up to her chin in salt water.  he first 
 idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, and in that 
 case i can go back by railway, she said to herself.  (alice had 
 been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general 
 conclusion, that wherever you go to on the english coast you find 
 a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in 
 the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and 
 behind them a railway station.)  however, she soon made out that 
 she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine 
 feet high. 
  
   i wish i hadnt cried so much said alice, as she swam about, 
 trying to find her way out.  i shall be punished for it now, i 
 suppose, by being drowned in my own tears  that will be a queer 
 thing, to be sure  however, everything is queer today. 
  
   just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a 
 little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was  at 
 first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then 
 she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that 
 it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself. 
  
   would it be of any use, now, thought alice, to speak to this 
 mouse  everything is so outoftheway down here, that i should 
 think very likely it can talk  at any rate, theres no harm in 
 trying.  so she began  o mouse, do you know the way out of 
 this pool  i am very tired of swimming about here, o mouse 
 (alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse 
 she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having 
 seen in her brothers latin grammar, a mouseof a mouseto a 
 mousea mouseo mouse  the mouse looked at her rather 
 inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little 
 eyes, but it said nothing. 
  
   perhaps it doesnt understand english, thought alice i 
 daresay its a french mouse, come over with william the 
 conqueror.  (for, with all her knowledge of history, alice had 
 no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)  so she 
 began again  ou est ma chatte which was the first sentence in 
 her french lessonbook.  the mouse gave a sudden leap out of the 
 water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  oh, i beg 
 your pardon cried alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the 
 poor animals feelings.  i quite forgot you didnt like cats. 
  
   not like cats cried the mouse, in a shrill, passionate 
 voice.  would you like cats if you were me 
  
   well, perhaps not, said alice in a soothing tone  dont be 
 angry about it.  and yet i wish i could show you our cat dinah 
 i think youd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. 
 she is such a dear quiet thing, alice went on, half to herself, 
 as she swam lazily about in the pool, and she sits purring so 
 nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her faceand 
 she is such a nice soft thing to nurseand shes such a capital 
 one for catching miceoh, i beg your pardon cried alice again, 
 for this time the mouse was bristling all over, and she felt 
 certain it must be really offended.  we wont talk about her any 
 more if youd rather not. 
  
   we indeed cried the mouse, who was trembling down to the end 
 of his tail.  as if i would talk on such a subject  our family 
 always hated cats  nasty, low, vulgar things  dont let me hear 
 the name again 
  
   i wont indeed said alice, in a great hurry to change the 
 subject of conversation.  are youare you fondofof dogs 
 the mouse did not answer, so alice went on eagerly  there is 
 such a nice little dog near our house i should like to show you 
 a little brighteyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly 
 brown hair  and itll fetch things when you throw them, and 
 itll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of thingsi 
 cant remember half of themand it belongs to a farmer, you 
 know, and he says its so useful, its worth a hundred pounds 
 he says it kills all the rats andoh dear cried alice in a 
 sorrowful tone, im afraid ive offended it again  for the 
 mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and 
 making quite a commotion in the pool as it went. 
  
   so she called softly after it, mouse dear  do come back 
 again, and we wont talk about cats or dogs either, if you dont 
 like them  when the mouse heard this, it turned round and swam 
 slowly back to her  its face was quite pale (with passion, alice 
 thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, let us get to 
 the shore, and then ill tell you my history, and youll 
 understand why it is i hate cats and dogs. 
  
   it was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded 
 with the birds and animals that had fallen into it  there were a 
 duck and a dodo, a lory and an eaglet, and several other curious 
 creatures.  alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the 
 shore. 
  
  
  
                            chapter iii 
  
                   a caucusrace and a long tale 
  
  
   they were indeed a queerlooking party that assembled on the 
 bankthe birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their 
 fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and 
 uncomfortable. 
  
   the first question of course was, how to get dry again  they 
 had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed 
 quite natural to alice to find herself talking familiarly with 
 them, as if she had known them all her life.  indeed, she had 
 quite a long argument with the lory, who at last turned sulky, 
 and would only say, i am older than you, and must know better 
 and this alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, 
 and, as the lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no 
 more to be said. 
  
   at last the mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among 
 them, called out, sit down, all of you, and listen to me  ill 
 soon make you dry enough  they all sat down at once, in a large 
 ring, with the mouse in the middle.  alice kept her eyes 
 anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad 
 cold if she did not get dry very soon. 
  
   ahem said the mouse with an important air, are you all ready 
 this is the driest thing i know.  silence all round, if you please 
 william the conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was 
 soon submitted to by the english, who wanted leaders, and had been 
 of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.  edwin and 
 morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria 
  
   ugh said the lory, with a shiver. 
  
   i beg your pardon said the mouse, frowning, but very 
 politely  did you speak 
  
   not i said the lory hastily. 
  
   i thought you did, said the mouse.  i proceed.  edwin and 
 morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria, declared for him 
 and even stigand, the patriotic archbishop of canterbury, found 
 it advisable 
  
   found what said the duck. 
  
   found it, the mouse replied rather crossly  of course you 
 know what it means. 
  
   i know what it means well enough, when i find a thing, said 
 the duck  its generally a frog or a worm.  the question is, 
 what did the archbishop find 
  
   the mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, 
 found it advisable to go with edgar atheling to meet william 
 and offer him the crown.  williams conduct at first was 
 moderate.  but the insolence of his normans  how are you 
 getting on now, my dear it continued, turning to alice as it 
 spoke. 
  
   as wet as ever, said alice in a melancholy tone  it doesnt 
 seem to dry me at all. 
  
   in that case, said the dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, i 
 move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more 
 energetic remedies 
  
   speak english said the eaglet.  i dont know the meaning of 
 half those long words, and, whats more, i dont believe you do 
 either  and the eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile 
 some of the other birds tittered audibly. 
  
   what i was going to say, said the dodo in an offended tone, 
 was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a caucusrace. 
  
   what is a caucusrace said alice not that she wanted much 
 to know, but the dodo had paused as if it thought that somebody 
 ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything. 
  
   why, said the dodo, the best way to explain it is to do it. 
 (and, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter 
 day, i will tell you how the dodo managed it.) 
  
   first it marked out a racecourse, in a sort of circle, (the 
 exact shape doesnt matter, it said,) and then all the party 
 were placed along the course, here and there.  there was no one, 
 two, three, and away, but they began running when they liked, 
 and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know 
 when the race was over.  however, when they had been running half 
 an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the dodo suddenly called 
 out the race is over and they all crowded round it, panting, 
 and asking, but who has won 
  
   this question the dodo could not answer without a great deal of 
 thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon 
 its forehead (the position in which you usually see shakespeare, 
 in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence.  at 
 last the dodo said, everybody has won, and all must have 
 prizes. 
  
   but who is to give the prizes quite a chorus of voices 
 asked. 
  
   why, she, of course, said the dodo, pointing to alice with 
 one finger and the whole party at once crowded round her, 
 calling out in a confused way, prizes prizes 
  
   alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand 
 in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt 
 water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. 
 there was exactly one apiece all round. 
  
   but she must have a prize herself, you know, said the mouse. 
  
   of course, the dodo replied very gravely.  what else have 
 you got in your pocket he went on, turning to alice. 
  
   only a thimble, said alice sadly. 
  
   hand it over here, said the dodo. 
  
   then they all crowded round her once more, while the dodo 
 solemnly presented the thimble, saying we beg your acceptance of 
 this elegant thimble and, when it had finished this short 
 speech, they all cheered. 
  
   alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked 
 so grave that she did not dare to laugh and, as she could not 
 think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, 
 looking as solemn as she could. 
  
   the next thing was to eat the comfits  this caused some noise 
 and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not 
 taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on 
 the back.  however, it was over at last, and they sat down again 
 in a ring, and begged the mouse to tell them something more. 
  
   you promised to tell me your history, you know, said alice, 
 and why it is you hatec and d, she added in a whisper, half 
 afraid that it would be offended again. 
  
   mine is a long and a sad tale said the mouse, turning to 
 alice, and sighing. 
  
   it is a long tail, certainly, said alice, looking down with 
 wonder at the mouses tail but why do you call it sad  and 
 she kept on puzzling about it while the mouse was speaking, so 
 that her idea of the tale was something like this 
  
                     fury said to a 
                    mouse, that he 
                  met in the 
                house, 
             let us 
               both go to 
                 law  i will 
                   prosecute 
                     you.  come, 
                        ill take no 
                         denial we 
                      must have a 
                  trial  for 
               really this 
            morning ive 
           nothing 
          to do. 
            said the 
              mouse to the 
                cur, such 
                  a trial, 
                    dear sir, 
                          with 
                      no jury 
                   or judge, 
                 would be 
               wasting 
              our 
               breath. 
                ill be 
                  judge, ill 
                    be jury, 
                          said 
                     cunning 
                       old fury 
                      ill 
                       try the 
                          whole 
                           cause, 
                              and 
                         condemn 
                        you 
                       to 
                        death. 
  
  
   you are not attending said the mouse to alice severely. 
 what are you thinking of 
  
   i beg your pardon, said alice very humbly  you had got to 
 the fifth bend, i think 
  
   i had not cried the mouse, sharply and very angrily. 
  
   a knot said alice, always ready to make herself useful, and 
 looking anxiously about her.  oh, do let me help to undo it 
  
   i shall do nothing of the sort, said the mouse, getting up 
 and walking away.  you insult me by talking such nonsense 
  
   i didnt mean it pleaded poor alice.  but youre so easily 
 offended, you know 
  
   the mouse only growled in reply. 
  
   please come back and finish your story alice called after 
 it and the others all joined in chorus, yes, please do but 
 the mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little 
 quicker. 
  
   what a pity it wouldnt stay sighed the lory, as soon as it 
 was quite out of sight and an old crab took the opportunity of 
 saying to her daughter ah, my dear  let this be a lesson to you 
 never to lose your temper  hold your tongue, ma said the 
 young crab, a little snappishly.  youre enough to try the 
 patience of an oyster 
  
   i wish i had our dinah here, i know i do said alice aloud, 
 addressing nobody in particular.  shed soon fetch it back 
  
   and who is dinah, if i might venture to ask the question 
 said the lory. 
  
   alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about 
 her pet  dinahs our cat.  and shes such a capital one for 
 catching mice you cant think  and oh, i wish you could see her 
 after the birds  why, shell eat a little bird as soon as look 
 at it 
  
   this speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. 
 some of the birds hurried off at once  one the old magpie began 
 wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, i really must be 
 getting home the nightair doesnt suit my throat and a canary 
 called out in a trembling voice to its children, come away, my 
 dears  its high time you were all in bed  on various pretexts 
 they all moved off, and alice was soon left alone. 
  
   i wish i hadnt mentioned dinah she said to herself in a 
 melancholy tone.  nobody seems to like her, down here, and im 
 sure shes the best cat in the world  oh, my dear dinah  i 
 wonder if i shall ever see you any more  and here poor alice 
 began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and lowspirited. 
 in a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of 
 footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping 
 that the mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to 
 finish his story. 
  
  
  
                            chapter iv 
  
                 the rabbit sends in a little bill 
  
  
   it was the white rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and 
 looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something 
 and she heard it muttering to itself the duchess  the duchess 
 oh my dear paws  oh my fur and whiskers  shell get me 
 executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets  where can i have 
 dropped them, i wonder  alice guessed in a moment that it was 
 looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she 
 very goodnaturedly began hunting about for them, but they were 
 nowhere to be seeneverything seemed to have changed since her 
 swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and 
 the little door, had vanished completely. 
  
   very soon the rabbit noticed alice, as she went hunting about, 
 and called out to her in an angry tone, why, mary ann, what are 
 you doing out here  run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of 
 gloves and a fan  quick, now  and alice was so much frightened 
 that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without 
 trying to explain the mistake it had made. 
  
   he took me for his housemaid, she said to herself as she ran. 
 how surprised hell be when he finds out who i am  but id 
 better take him his fan and glovesthat is, if i can find them. 
 as she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door 
 of which was a bright brass plate with the name w. rabbit 
 engraved upon it.  she went in without knocking, and hurried 
 upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real mary ann, 
 and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and 
 gloves. 
  
   how queer it seems, alice said to herself, to be going 
 messages for a rabbit  i suppose dinahll be sending me on 
 messages next  and she began fancying the sort of thing that 
 would happen  miss alice  come here directly, and get ready 
 for your walk coming in a minute, nurse  but ive got to see 
 that the mouse doesnt get out.  only i dont think, alice went 
 on, that theyd let dinah stop in the house if it began ordering 
 people about like that 
  
   by this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with 
 a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two 
 or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves  she took up the fan and 
 a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when 
 her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking 
 glass.  there was no label this time with the words drink me, 
 but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.  i know 
 something interesting is sure to happen, she said to herself, 
 whenever i eat or drink anything so ill just see what this 
 bottle does.  i do hope itll make me grow large again, for 
 really im quite tired of being such a tiny little thing 
  
   it did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected 
 before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing 
 against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being 
 broken.  she hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself 
 thats quite enoughi hope i shant grow any moreas it is, i 
 cant get out at the doori do wish i hadnt drunk quite so 
 much 
  
   alas it was too late to wish that  she went on growing, and 
 growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor  in 
 another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried 
 the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the 
 other arm curled round her head.  still she went on growing, and, 
 as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one 
 foot up the chimney, and said to herself now i can do no more, 
 whatever happens.  what will become of me 
  
   luckily for alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full 
 effect, and she grew no larger  still it was very uncomfortable, 
 and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting 
 out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy. 
  
   it was much pleasanter at home, thought poor alice, when one 
 wasnt always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about 
 by mice and rabbits.  i almost wish i hadnt gone down that 
 rabbitholeand yetand yetits rather curious, you know, 
 this sort of life  i do wonder what can have happened to me 
 when i used to read fairytales, i fancied that kind of thing 
 never happened, and now here i am in the middle of one  there 
 ought to be a book written about me, that there ought  and when 
 i grow up, ill write onebut im grown up now, she added in a 
 sorrowful tone at least theres no room to grow up any more 
 here. 
  
   but then, thought alice, shall i never get any older than i 
 am now  thatll be a comfort, one waynever to be an old woman 
 but thenalways to have lessons to learn  oh, i shouldnt like 
 that 
  
   oh, you foolish alice she answered herself.  how can you 
 learn lessons in here  why, theres hardly room for you, and no 
 room at all for any lessonbooks 
  
   and so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, 
 and making quite a conversation of it altogether but after a few 
 minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen. 
  
   mary ann  mary ann said the voice.  fetch me my gloves 
 this moment  then came a little pattering of feet on the 
 stairs.  alice knew it was the rabbit coming to look for her, and 
 she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she 
 was now about a thousand times as large as the rabbit, and had no 
 reason to be afraid of it. 
  
   presently the rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it 
 but, as the door opened inwards, and alices elbow was pressed 
 hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  alice heard it 
 say to itself then ill go round and get in at the window. 
  
   that you wont thought alice, and, after waiting till she 
 fancied she heard the rabbit just under the window, she suddenly 
 spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.  she did not 
 get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, 
 and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was 
 just possible it had fallen into a cucumberframe, or something 
 of the sort. 
  
   next came an angry voicethe rabbitspat pat  where are 
 you  and then a voice she had never heard before, sure then 
 im here  digging for apples, yer honour 
  
   digging for apples, indeed said the rabbit angrily.  here 
 come and help me out of this  (sounds of more broken glass.) 
  
   now tell me, pat, whats that in the window 
  
   sure, its an arm, yer honour  (he pronounced it arrum.) 
  
   an arm, you goose   who ever saw one that size  why, it 
 fills the whole window 
  
   sure, it does, yer honour  but its an arm for all that. 
  
   well, its got no business there, at any rate  go and take it 
 away 
  
   there was a long silence after this, and alice could only hear 
 whispers now and then such as, sure, i dont like it, yer 
 honour, at all, at all  do as i tell you, you coward and at 
 last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in 
 the air.  this time there were two little shrieks, and more 
 sounds of broken glass.  what a number of cucumberframes there 
 must be thought alice.  i wonder what theyll do next  as for 
 pulling me out of the window, i only wish they could  im sure i 
 dont want to stay in here any longer 
  
   she waited for some time without hearing anything more  at 
 last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a 
 good many voice all talking together  she made out the words 
 wheres the other ladderwhy, i hadnt to bring but one 
 bills got the otherbill fetch it here, ladhere, put em up 
 at this cornerno, tie em together firstthey dont reach half 
 high enough yetoh theyll do well enough dont be particular 
 here, bill catch hold of this ropewill the roof bearmind 
 that loose slateoh, its coming down  heads below (a loud 
 crash)now, who did thatit was bill, i fancywhos to go 
 down the chimneynay, i shant you do itthat i wont, 
 thenbills to go downhere, bill the master says youre to 
 go down the chimney 
  
   oh so bills got to come down the chimney, has he said 
 alice to herself.  shy, they seem to put everything upon bill 
 i wouldnt be in bills place for a good deal  this fireplace is 
 narrow, to be sure but i think i can kick a little 
  
   she drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and 
 waited till she heard a little animal (she couldnt guess of what 
 sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close 
 above her  then, saying to herself this is bill, she gave one 
 sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next. 
  
   the first thing she heard was a general chorus of there goes 
 bill then the rabbits voice alongcatch him, you by the 
 hedge then silence, and then another confusion of voiceshold 
 up his headbrandy nowdont choke himhow was it, old fellow 
 what happened to you  tell us all about it 
  
   last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (thats bill, 
 thought alice,) well, i hardly knowno more, thank ye im 
 better nowbut im a deal too flustered to tell youall i know 
 is, something comes at me like a jackinthebox, and up i goes 
 like a skyrocket 
  
   so you did, old fellow said the others. 
  
   we must burn the house down said the rabbits voice and 
 alice called out as loud as she could, if you do.  ill set 
 dinah at you 
  
   there was a dead silence instantly, and alice thought to 
 herself, i wonder what they will do next  if they had any 
 sense, theyd take the roof off.  after a minute or two, they 
 began moving about again, and alice heard the rabbit say, a 
 barrowful will do, to begin with. 
  
   a barrowful of what thought alice but she had not long to 
 doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came 
 rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face. 
 ill put a stop to this, she said to herself, and shouted out, 
 youd better not do that again which produced another dead 
 silence. 
  
   alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all 
 turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright 
 idea came into her head.  if i eat one of these cakes, she 
 thought, its sure to make some change in my size and as it 
 cant possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, i 
 suppose. 
  
   so she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find 
 that she began shrinking directly.  as soon as she was small 
 enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and 
 found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside. 
 the poor little lizard, bill, was in the middle, being held up by 
 two guineapigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle. 
 they all made a rush at alice the moment she appeared but she 
 ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a 
 thick wood. 
  
   the first thing ive got to do, said alice to herself, as she 
 wandered about in the wood, is to grow to my right size again 
 and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. 
 i think that will be the best plan. 
  
   it sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and 
 simply arranged the only difficulty was, that she had not the 
 smallest idea how to set about it and while she was peering 
 about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over 
 her head made her look up in a great hurry. 
  
   an enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round 
 eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. 
 poor little thing said alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried 
 hard to whistle to it but she was terribly frightened all the 
 time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it 
 would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing. 
  
   hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of 
 stick, and held it out to the puppy whereupon the puppy jumped 
 into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, 
 and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it then alice 
 dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run 
 over and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy 
 made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in 
 its hurry to get hold of it then alice, thinking it was very 
 like having a game of play with a carthorse, and expecting every 
 moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle 
 again then the puppy began a series of short charges at the 
 stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long 
 way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat 
 down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its 
 mouth, and its great eyes half shut. 
  
   this seemed to alice a good opportunity for making her escape 
 so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out 
 of breath, and till the puppys bark sounded quite faint in the 
 distance. 
  
   and yet what a dear little puppy it was said alice, as she 
 leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself 
 with one of the leaves  i should have liked teaching it tricks 
 very much, ifif id only been the right size to do it  oh 
 dear  id nearly forgotten that ive got to grow up again  let 
 me seehow is it to be managed  i suppose i ought to eat or 
 drink something or other but the great question is, what 
  
   the great question certainly was, what  alice looked all round 
 her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see 
 anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under 
 the circumstances.  there was a large mushroom growing near her, 
 about the same height as herself and when she had looked under 
 it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her 
 that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it. 
  
   she stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of 
 the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large 
 caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, 
 quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice 
 of her or of anything else. 
  
  
  
                             chapter v 
  
                     advice from a caterpillar 
  
  
   the caterpillar and alice looked at each other for some time in 
 silence  at last the caterpillar took the hookah out of its 
 mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice. 
  
   who are you said the caterpillar. 
  
   this was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.  alice 
 replied, rather shyly, ii hardly know, sir, just at present 
 at least i know who i was when i got up this morning, but i think 
 i must have been changed several times since then. 
  
   what do you mean by that said the caterpillar sternly. 
 explain yourself 
  
   i cant explain myself, im afraid, sir said alice, because 
 im not myself, you see. 
  
   i dont see, said the caterpillar. 
  
   im afraid i cant put it more clearly, alice replied very 
 politely, for i cant understand it myself to begin with and 
 being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing. 
  
   it isnt, said the caterpillar. 
  
   well, perhaps you havent found it so yet, said alice but 
 when you have to turn into a chrysalisyou will some day, you 
 knowand then after that into a butterfly, i should think youll 
 feel it a little queer, wont you 
  
   not a bit, said the caterpillar. 
  
   well, perhaps your feelings may be different, said alice 
 all i know is, it would feel very queer to me. 
  
   you said the caterpillar contemptuously.  who are you 
  
   which brought them back again to the beginning of the 
 conversation.  alice felt a little irritated at the caterpillars 
 making such very short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, 
 very gravely, i think, you ought to tell me who you are, first. 
  
   why said the caterpillar. 
  
   here was another puzzling question and as alice could not 
 think of any good reason, and as the caterpillar seemed to be in 
 a very unpleasant state of mind, she turned away. 
  
   come back the caterpillar called after her.  ive something 
 important to say 
  
   this sounded promising, certainly  alice turned and came back 
 again. 
  
   keep your temper, said the caterpillar. 
  
   is that all said alice, swallowing down her anger as well as 
 she could. 
  
   no, said the caterpillar. 
  
   alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else 
 to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth 
 hearing.  for some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but 
 at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth 
 again, and said, so you think youre changed, do you 
  
   im afraid i am, sir, said alice i cant remember things as 
 i usedand i dont keep the same size for ten minutes together 
  
   cant remember what things said the caterpillar. 
  
   well, ive tried to say how doth the little busy bee, but it 
 all came different alice replied in a very melancholy voice. 
  
   repeat, you are old, father william, said the caterpillar. 
  
   alice folded her hands, and began 
  
     you are old, father william, the young man said, 
       and your hair has become very white 
     and yet you incessantly stand on your head 
       do you think, at your age, it is right 
  
     in my youth, father william replied to his son, 
       i feared it might injure the brain 
     but, now that im perfectly sure i have none, 
       why, i do it again and again. 
  
     you are old, said the youth, as i mentioned before, 
       and have grown most uncommonly fat 
     yet you turned a backsomersault in at the door 
       pray, what is the reason of that 
  
     in my youth, said the sage, as he shook his grey locks, 
       i kept all my limbs very supple 
     by the use of this ointmentone shilling the box 
       allow me to sell you a couple 
  
     you are old, said the youth, and your jaws are too weak 
       for anything tougher than suet 
     yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak 
       pray how did you manage to do it 
  
     in my youth, said his father, i took to the law, 
       and argued each case with my wife 
     and the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw, 
       has lasted the rest of my life. 
  
     you are old, said the youth, one would hardly suppose 
       that your eye was as steady as ever 
     yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose 
       what made you so awfully clever 
  
     i have answered three questions, and that is enough, 
       said his father dont give yourself airs 
     do you think i can listen all day to such stuff 
       be off, or ill kick you down stairs 
  
  
   that is not said right, said the caterpillar. 
  
   not quite right, im afraid, said alice, timidly some of the 
 words have got altered. 
  
   it is wrong from beginning to end, said the caterpillar 
 decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes. 
  
   the caterpillar was the first to speak. 
  
   what size do you want to be it asked. 
  
   oh, im not particular as to size, alice hastily replied 
 only one doesnt like changing so often, you know. 
  
   i dont know, said the caterpillar. 
  
   alice said nothing  she had never been so much contradicted in 
 her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper. 
  
   are you content now said the caterpillar. 
  
   well, i should like to be a little larger, sir, if you 
 wouldnt mind, said alice  three inches is such a wretched 
 height to be. 
  
   it is a very good height indeed said the caterpillar 
 angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three 
 inches high). 
  
   but im not used to it pleaded poor alice in a piteous tone. 
 and she thought of herself, i wish the creatures wouldnt be so 
 easily offended 
  
   youll get used to it in time, said the caterpillar and it 
 put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again. 
  
   this time alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. 
 in a minute or two the caterpillar took the hookah out of its 
 mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself.  then it got 
 down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely 
 remarking as it went, one side will make you grow taller, and 
 the other side will make you grow shorter. 
  
   one side of what  the other side of what thought alice to 
 herself. 
  
   of the mushroom, said the caterpillar, just as if she had 
 asked it aloud and in another moment it was out of sight. 
  
   alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a 
 minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it and as 
 it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. 
 however, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they 
 would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand. 
  
   and now which is which she said to herself, and nibbled a 
 little of the righthand bit to try the effect  the next moment 
 she felt a violent blow underneath her chin  it had struck her 
 foot 
  
   she was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but 
 she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking 
 rapidly so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. 
 her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was 
 hardly room to open her mouth but she did it at last, and 
 managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit. 
  
  
                                                 
  
                                              
  
                                                 
  
   come, my heads free at last said alice in a tone of 
 delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she 
 found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found  all she could 
 see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which 
 seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay 
 far below her. 
  
   what can all that green stuff be said alice.  and where 
 have my shoulders got to  and oh, my poor hands, how is it i 
 cant see you  she was moving them about as she spoke, but no 
 result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the 
 distant green leaves. 
  
   as there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her 
 head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted 
 to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, 
 like a serpent.  she had just succeeded in curving it down into a 
 graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which 
 she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she 
 had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a 
 hurry  a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating 
 her violently with its wings. 
  
   serpent screamed the pigeon. 
  
   im not a serpent said alice indignantly.  let me alone 
  
   serpent, i say again repeated the pigeon, but in a more 
 subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, ive tried every 
 way, and nothing seems to suit them 
  
   i havent the least idea what youre talking about, said 
 alice. 
  
   ive tried the roots of trees, and ive tried banks, and ive 
 tried hedges, the pigeon went on, without attending to her but 
 those serpents  theres no pleasing them 
  
   alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no 
 use in saying anything more till the pigeon had finished. 
  
   as if it wasnt trouble enough hatching the eggs, said the 
 pigeon but i must be on the lookout for serpents night and 
 day  why, i havent had a wink of sleep these three weeks 
  
   im very sorry youve been annoyed, said alice, who was 
 beginning to see its meaning. 
  
   and just as id taken the highest tree in the wood, continued 
 the pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, and just as i was 
 thinking i should be free of them at last, they must needs come 
 wriggling down from the sky  ugh, serpent 
  
   but im not a serpent, i tell you said alice.  im aim 
 a 
  
   well  what are you said the pigeon.  i can see youre 
 trying to invent something 
  
   iim a little girl, said alice, rather doubtfully, as she 
 remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day. 
  
   a likely story indeed said the pigeon in a tone of the 
 deepest contempt.  ive seen a good many little girls in my 
 time, but never one with such a neck as that  no, no  youre a 
 serpent and theres no use denying it.  i suppose youll be 
 telling me next that you never tasted an egg 
  
   i have tasted eggs, certainly, said alice, who was a very 
 truthful child but little girls eat eggs quite as much as 
 serpents do, you know. 
  
   i dont believe it, said the pigeon but if they do, why 
 then theyre a kind of serpent, thats all i can say. 
  
   this was such a new idea to alice, that she was quite silent 
 for a minute or two, which gave the pigeon the opportunity of 
 adding, youre looking for eggs, i know that well enough and 
 what does it matter to me whether youre a little girl or a 
 serpent 
  
   it matters a good deal to me, said alice hastily but im 
 not looking for eggs, as it happens and if i was, i shouldnt 
 want yours  i dont like them raw. 
  
   well, be off, then said the pigeon in a sulky tone, as it 
 settled down again into its nest.  alice crouched down among the 
 trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled 
 among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and 
 untwist it.  after a while she remembered that she still held the 
 pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very 
 carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and 
 growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had 
 succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height. 
  
   it was so long since she had been anything near the right size, 
 that it felt quite strange at first but she got used to it in a 
 few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual.  come, 
 theres half my plan done now  how puzzling all these changes 
 are  im never sure what im going to be, from one minute to 
 another  however, ive got back to my right size  the next 
 thing is, to get into that beautiful gardenhow is that to be 
 done, i wonder  as she said this, she came suddenly upon an 
 open place, with a little house in it about four feet high. 
 whoever lives there, thought alice, itll never do to come 
 upon them this size  why, i should frighten them out of their 
 wits  so she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did 
 not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself 
 down to nine inches high. 
  
  
  
                            chapter vi 
  
                          pig and pepper 
  
  
   for a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and 
 wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came 
 running out of the wood(she considered him to be a footman 
 because he was in livery  otherwise, judging by his face only, 
 she would have called him a fish)and rapped loudly at the door 
 with his knuckles.  it was opened by another footman in livery, 
 with a round face, and large eyes like a frog and both footmen, 
 alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their 
 heads.  she felt very curious to know what it was all about, and 
 crept a little way out of the wood to listen. 
  
   the fishfootman began by producing from under his arm a great 
 letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to 
 the other, saying, in a solemn tone, for the duchess.  an 
 invitation from the queen to play croquet.  the frogfootman 
 repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the 
 words a little, from the queen.  an invitation for the duchess 
 to play croquet. 
  
   then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled 
 together. 
  
   alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into 
 the wood for fear of their hearing her and when she next peeped 
 out the fishfootman was gone, and the other was sitting on the 
 ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky. 
  
   alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked. 
  
   theres no sort of use in knocking, said the footman, and 
 that for two reasons.  first, because im on the same side of the 
 door as you are secondly, because theyre making such a noise 
 inside, no one could possibly hear you.  and certainly there was 
 a most extraordinary noise going on withina constant howling 
 and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish 
 or kettle had been broken to pieces. 
  
   please, then, said alice, how am i to get in 
  
   there might be some sense in your knocking, the footman went 
 on without attending to her, if we had the door between us.  for 
 instance, if you were inside, you might knock, and i could let 
 you out, you know.  he was looking up into the sky all the time 
 he was speaking, and this alice thought decidedly uncivil.  but 
 perhaps he cant help it, she said to herself his eyes are so 
 very nearly at the top of his head.  but at any rate he might 
 answer questions.how am i to get in she repeated, aloud. 
  
   i shall sit here, the footman remarked, till tomorrow 
  
   at this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate 
 came skimming out, straight at the footmans head  it just 
 grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees 
 behind him. 
  
   or next day, maybe, the footman continued in the same tone, 
 exactly as if nothing had happened. 
  
   how am i to get in asked alice again, in a louder tone. 
  
   are you to get in at all said the footman.  thats the 
 first question, you know. 
  
   it was, no doubt  only alice did not like to be told so. 
 its really dreadful, she muttered to herself, the way all the 
 creatures argue.  its enough to drive one crazy 
  
   the footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for 
 repeating his remark, with variations.  i shall sit here, he 
 said, on and off, for days and days. 
  
   but what am i to do said alice. 
  
   anything you like, said the footman, and began whistling. 
  
   oh, theres no use in talking to him, said alice desperately 
 hes perfectly idiotic  and she opened the door and went in. 
  
   the door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of 
 smoke from one end to the other  the duchess was sitting on a 
 threelegged stool in the middle, nursing a baby the cook was 
 leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to 
 be full of soup. 
  
   theres certainly too much pepper in that soup alice said to 
 herself, as well as she could for sneezing. 
  
   there was certainly too much of it in the air.  even the 
 duchess sneezed occasionally and as for the baby, it was 
 sneezing and howling alternately without a moments pause.  the 
 only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook, 
 and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from 
 ear to ear. 
  
   please would you tell me, said alice, a little timidly, for 
 she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to 
 speak first, why your cat grins like that 
  
   its a cheshire cat, said the duchess, and thats why. 
 pig 
  
   she said the last word with such sudden violence that alice 
 quite jumped but she saw in another moment that it was addressed 
 to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on 
 again 
  
   i didnt know that cheshire cats always grinned in fact, i 
 didnt know that cats could grin. 
  
   they all can, said the duchess and most of em do. 
  
   i dont know of any that do, alice said very politely, 
 feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation. 
  
   you dont know much, said the duchess and thats a fact. 
  
   alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought 
 it would be as well to introduce some other subject of 
 conversation.  while she was trying to fix on one, the cook took 
 the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work 
 throwing everything within her reach at the duchess and the baby 
 the fireirons came first then followed a shower of saucepans, 
 plates, and dishes.  the duchess took no notice of them even when 
 they hit her and the baby was howling so much already, that it 
 was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not. 
  
   oh, please mind what youre doing cried alice, jumping up 
 and down in an agony of terror.  oh, there goes his precious 
 nose as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very 
 nearly carried it off. 
  
   if everybody minded their own business, the duchess said in a 
 hoarse growl, the world would go round a deal faster than it 
 does. 
  
   which would not be an advantage, said alice, who felt very 
 glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her 
 knowledge.  just think of what work it would make with the day 
 and night  you see the earth takes twentyfour hours to turn 
 round on its axis 
  
   talking of axes, said the duchess, chop off her head 
  
   alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant 
 to take the hint but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and 
 seemed not to be listening, so she went on again  twentyfour 
 hours, i think or is it twelve  i 
  
   oh, dont bother me, said the duchess i never could abide 
 figures  and with that she began nursing her child again, 
 singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a 
 violent shake at the end of every line 
  
         speak roughly to your little boy, 
           and beat him when he sneezes 
         he only does it to annoy, 
           because he knows it teases. 
  
                     chorus. 
  
     (in which the cook and the baby joined) 
  
                 wow wow wow 
  
   while the duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept 
 tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing 
 howled so, that alice could hardly hear the words 
  
         i speak severely to my boy, 
           i beat him when he sneezes 
         for he can thoroughly enjoy 
           the pepper when he pleases 
  
                     chorus. 
  
                 wow wow wow 
  
   here you may nurse it a bit, if you like the duchess said 
 to alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke.  i must go and 
 get ready to play croquet with the queen, and she hurried out of 
 the room.  the cook threw a fryingpan after her as she went out, 
 but it just missed her. 
  
   alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer 
 shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all 
 directions, just like a starfish, thought alice.  the poor 
 little thing was snorting like a steamengine when she caught it, 
 and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, 
 so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much 
 as she could do to hold it. 
  
   as soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, 
 (which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep 
 tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its 
 undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air.  if i 
 dont take this child away with me, thought alice, theyre sure 
 to kill it in a day or two  wouldnt it be murder to leave it 
 behind  she said the last words out loud, and the little thing 
 grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).  dont 
 grunt, said alice thats not at all a proper way of expressing 
 yourself. 
  
   the baby grunted again, and alice looked very anxiously into 
 its face to see what was the matter with it.  there could be no 
 doubt that it had a very turnup nose, much more like a snout 
 than a real nose also its eyes were getting extremely small for 
 a baby  altogether alice did not like the look of the thing at 
 all.  but perhaps it was only sobbing, she thought, and looked 
 into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears. 
  
   no, there were no tears.  if youre going to turn into a pig, 
 my dear, said alice, seriously, ill have nothing more to do 
 with you.  mind now  the poor little thing sobbed again (or 
 grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for 
 some while in silence. 
  
   alice was just beginning to think to herself, now, what am i 
 to do with this creature when i get it home when it grunted 
 again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some 
 alarm.  this time there could be no mistake about it  it was 
 neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be 
 quite absurd for her to carry it further. 
  
   so she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to 
 see it trot away quietly into the wood.  if it had grown up, 
 she said to herself, it would have made a dreadfully ugly child 
 but it makes rather a handsome pig, i think.  and she began 
 thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as 
 pigs, and was just saying to herself, if one only knew the right 
 way to change them when she was a little startled by seeing 
 the cheshire cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off. 
  
   the cat only grinned when it saw alice.  it looked good 
 natured, she thought  still it had very long claws and a great 
 many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect. 
  
   cheshire puss, she began, rather timidly, as she did not at 
 all know whether it would like the name  however, it only 
 grinned a little wider.  come, its pleased so far, thought 
 alice, and she went on.  would you tell me, please, which way i 
 ought to go from here 
  
   that depends a good deal on where you want to get to, said 
 the cat. 
  
   i dont much care where said alice. 
  
   then it doesnt matter which way you go, said the cat. 
  
   so long as i get somewhere, alice added as an explanation. 
  
   oh, youre sure to do that, said the cat, if you only walk 
 long enough. 
  
   alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another 
 question.  what sort of people live about here 
  
   in that direction, the cat said, waving its right paw round, 
 lives a hatter  and in that direction, waving the other paw, 
 lives a march hare.  visit either you like  theyre both mad. 
  
   but i dont want to go among mad people, alice remarked. 
  
   oh, you cant help that, said the cat  were all mad here. 
 im mad.  youre mad. 
  
   how do you know im mad said alice. 
  
   you must be, said the cat, or you wouldnt have come here. 
  
   alice didnt think that proved it at all however, she went on 
 and how do you know that youre mad 
  
   to begin with, said the cat, a dogs not mad.  you grant 
 that 
  
   i suppose so, said alice. 
  
   well, then, the cat went on, you see, a dog growls when its 
 angry, and wags its tail when its pleased.  now i growl when im 
 pleased, and wag my tail when im angry.  therefore im mad. 
  
   i call it purring, not growling, said alice. 
  
   call it what you like, said the cat.  do you play croquet 
 with the queen today 
  
   i should like it very much, said alice, but i havent been 
 invited yet. 
  
   youll see me there, said the cat, and vanished. 
  
   alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used 
 to queer things happening.  while she was looking at the place 
 where it had been, it suddenly appeared again. 
  
   bythebye, what became of the baby said the cat.  id 
 nearly forgotten to ask. 
  
   it turned into a pig, alice quietly said, just as if it had 
 come back in a natural way. 
  
   i thought it would, said the cat, and vanished again. 
  
   alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it 
 did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the 
 direction in which the march hare was said to live.  ive seen 
 hatters before, she said to herself the march hare will be 
 much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is may it wont be 
 raving madat least not so mad as it was in march.  as she said 
 this, she looked up, and there was the cat again, sitting on a 
 branch of a tree. 
  
   did you say pig, or fig said the cat. 
  
   i said pig, replied alice and i wish you wouldnt keep 
 appearing and vanishing so suddenly  you make one quite giddy. 
  
   all right, said the cat and this time it vanished quite 
 slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the 
 grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone. 
  
   well  ive often seen a cat without a grin, thought alice 
 but a grin without a cat  its the most curious thing i ever 
 say in my life 
  
   she had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the 
 house of the march hare  she thought it must be the right house, 
 because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was 
 thatched with fur.  it was so large a house, that she did not 
 like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand 
 bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high  even 
 then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself 
 suppose it should be raving mad after all  i almost wish id 
 gone to see the hatter instead 
  
  
  
                            chapter vii 
  
                          a mad teaparty 
  
  
   there was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, 
 and the march hare and the hatter were having tea at it  a 
 dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two 
 were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and the 
 talking over its head.  very uncomfortable for the dormouse, 
 thought alice only, as its asleep, i suppose it doesnt mind. 
  
   the table was a large one, but the three were all crowded 
 together at one corner of it  no room  no room they cried 
 out when they saw alice coming.  theres plenty of room said 
 alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large armchair at one 
 end of the table. 
  
   have some wine, the march hare said in an encouraging tone. 
  
   alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it 
 but tea.  i dont see any wine, she remarked. 
  
   there isnt any, said the march hare. 
  
   then it wasnt very civil of you to offer it, said alice 
 angrily. 
  
   it wasnt very civil of you to sit down without being 
 invited, said the march hare. 
  
   i didnt know it was your table, said alice its laid for a 
 great many more than three. 
  
   your hair wants cutting, said the hatter.  he had been 
 looking at alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was 
 his first speech. 
  
   you should learn not to make personal remarks, alice said 
 with some severity its very rude. 
  
   the hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this but all 
 he said was, why is a raven like a writingdesk 
  
   come, we shall have some fun now thought alice.  im glad 
 theyve begun asking riddles.i believe i can guess that, she 
 added aloud. 
  
   do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it 
 said the march hare. 
  
   exactly so, said alice. 
  
   then you should say what you mean, the march hare went on. 
  
   i do, alice hastily replied at leastat least i mean what 
 i saythats the same thing, you know. 
  
   not the same thing a bit said the hatter.  you might just 
 as well say that i see what i eat is the same thing as i eat 
 what i see 
  
   you might just as well say, added the march hare, that i 
 like what i get is the same thing as i get what i like 
  
   you might just as well say, added the dormouse, who seemed to 
 be talking in his sleep, that i breathe when i sleep is the 
 same thing as i sleep when i breathe 
  
   it is the same thing with you, said the hatter, and here the 
 conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, 
 while alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and 
 writingdesks, which wasnt much. 
  
   the hatter was the first to break the silence.  what day of 
 the month is it he said, turning to alice  he had taken his 
 watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking 
 it every now and then, and holding it to his ear. 
  
   alice considered a little, and then said the fourth. 
  
   two days wrong sighed the hatter.  i told you butter 
 wouldnt suit the works he added looking angrily at the march 
 hare. 
  
   it was the best butter, the march hare meekly replied. 
  
   yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well, the hatter 
 grumbled  you shouldnt have put it in with the breadknife. 
  
   the march hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily  then 
 he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again  but he 
 could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, it 
 was the best butter, you know. 
  
   alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. 
 what a funny watch she remarked.  it tells the day of the 
 month, and doesnt tell what oclock it is 
  
   why should it muttered the hatter.  does your watch tell 
 you what year it is 
  
   of course not, alice replied very readily  but thats 
 because it stays the same year for such a long time together. 
  
   which is just the case with mine, said the hatter. 
  
   alice felt dreadfully puzzled.  the hatters remark seemed to 
 have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly english. 
 i dont quite understand you, she said, as politely as she 
 could. 
  
   the dormouse is asleep again, said the hatter, and he poured 
 a little hot tea upon its nose. 
  
   the dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without 
 opening its eyes, of course, of course just what i was going to 
 remark myself. 
  
   have you guessed the riddle yet the hatter said, turning to 
 alice again. 
  
   no, i give it up, alice replied  whats the answer 
  
   i havent the slightest idea, said the hatter. 
  
   nor i, said the march hare. 
  
   alice sighed wearily.  i think you might do something better 
 with the time, she said, than waste it in asking riddles that 
 have no answers. 
  
   if you knew time as well as i do, said the hatter, you 
 wouldnt talk about wasting it.  its him. 
  
   i dont know what you mean, said alice. 
  
   of course you dont the hatter said, tossing his head 
 contemptuously.  i dare say you never even spoke to time 
  
   perhaps not, alice cautiously replied  but i know i have to 
 beat time when i learn music. 
  
   ah that accounts for it, said the hatter.  he wont stand 
 beating.  now, if you only kept on good terms with him, hed do 
 almost anything you liked with the clock.  for instance, suppose 
 it were nine oclock in the morning, just time to begin lessons 
 youd only have to whisper a hint to time, and round goes the 
 clock in a twinkling  halfpast one, time for dinner 
  
   (i only wish it was, the march hare said to itself in a 
 whisper.) 
  
   that would be grand, certainly, said alice thoughtfully 
 but theni shouldnt be hungry for it, you know. 
  
   not at first, perhaps, said the hatter  but you could keep 
 it to halfpast one as long as you liked. 
  
   is that the way you manage alice asked. 
  
   the hatter shook his head mournfully.  not i he replied. 
 we quarrelled last marchjust before he went mad, you know 
 (pointing with his tea spoon at the march hare,) it was at the 
 great concert given by the queen of hearts, and i had to sing 
  
             twinkle, twinkle, little bat 
             how i wonder what youre at 
  
 you know the song, perhaps 
  
   ive heard something like it, said alice. 
  
   it goes on, you know, the hatter continued, in this way 
  
             up above the world you fly, 
             like a teatray in the sky. 
                     twinkle, twinkle 
  
 here the dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep 
 twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle and went on so long that 
 they had to pinch it to make it stop. 
  
   well, id hardly finished the first verse, said the hatter, 
 when the queen jumped up and bawled out, hes murdering the 
 time  off with his head 
  
   how dreadfully savage exclaimed alice. 
  
   and ever since that, the hatter went on in a mournful tone, 
 he wont do a thing i ask  its always six oclock now. 
  
   a bright idea came into alices head.  is that the reason so 
 many teathings are put out here she asked. 
  
   yes, thats it, said the hatter with a sigh  its always 
 teatime, and weve no time to wash the things between whiles. 
  
   then you keep moving round, i suppose said alice. 
  
   exactly so, said the hatter  as the things get used up. 
  
   but what happens when you come to the beginning again alice 
 ventured to ask. 
  
   suppose we change the subject, the march hare interrupted, 
 yawning.  im getting tired of this.  i vote the young lady 
 tells us a story. 
  
   im afraid i dont know one, said alice, rather alarmed at 
 the proposal. 
  
   then the dormouse shall they both cried.  wake up, 
 dormouse  and they pinched it on both sides at once. 
  
   the dormouse slowly opened his eyes.  i wasnt asleep, he 
 said in a hoarse, feeble voice  i heard every word you fellows 
 were saying. 
  
   tell us a story said the march hare. 
  
   yes, please do pleaded alice. 
  
   and be quick about it, added the hatter, or youll be asleep 
 again before its done. 
  
   once upon a time there were three little sisters, the 
 dormouse began in a great hurry and their names were elsie, 
 lacie, and tillie and they lived at the bottom of a well 
  
   what did they live on said alice, who always took a great 
 interest in questions of eating and drinking. 
  
   they lived on treacle, said the dormouse, after thinking a 
 minute or two. 
  
   they couldnt have done that, you know, alice gently 
 remarked theyd have been ill. 
  
   so they were, said the dormouse very ill. 
  
   alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways 
 of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went 
 on  but why did they live at the bottom of a well 
  
   take some more tea, the march hare said to alice, very 
 earnestly. 
  
   ive had nothing yet, alice replied in an offended tone, so 
 i cant take more. 
  
   you mean you cant take less, said the hatter  its very 
 easy to take more than nothing. 
  
   nobody asked your opinion, said alice. 
  
   whos making personal remarks now the hatter asked 
 triumphantly. 
  
   alice did not quite know what to say to this  so she helped 
 herself to some tea and breadandbutter, and then turned to the 
 dormouse, and repeated her question.  why did they live at the 
 bottom of a well 
  
   the dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and 
 then said, it was a treaclewell. 
  
   theres no such thing  alice was beginning very angrily, but 
 the hatter and the march hare went sh sh and the dormouse 
 sulkily remarked, if you cant be civil, youd better finish the 
 story for yourself. 
  
   no, please go on alice said very humbly i wont interrupt 
 again.  i dare say there may be one. 
  
   one, indeed said the dormouse indignantly.  however, he 
 consented to go on.  and so these three little sistersthey 
 were learning to draw, you know 
  
   what did they draw said alice, quite forgetting her promise. 
  
   treacle, said the dormouse, without considering at all this 
 time. 
  
   i want a clean cup, interrupted the hatter  lets all move 
 one place on. 
  
   he moved on as he spoke, and the dormouse followed him  the 
 march hare moved into the dormouses place, and alice rather 
 unwillingly took the place of the march hare.  the hatter was the 
 only one who got any advantage from the change  and alice was a 
 good deal worse off than before, as the march hare had just upset 
 the milkjug into his plate. 
  
   alice did not wish to offend the dormouse again, so she began 
 very cautiously  but i dont understand.  where did they draw 
 the treacle from 
  
   you can draw water out of a waterwell, said the hatter so 
 i should think you could draw treacle out of a treaclewelleh, 
 stupid 
  
   but they were in the well, alice said to the dormouse, not 
 choosing to notice this last remark. 
  
   of course they were, said the dormouse well in. 
  
   this answer so confused poor alice, that she let the dormouse 
 go on for some time without interrupting it. 
  
   they were learning to draw, the dormouse went on, yawning and 
 rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy and they drew 
 all manner of thingseverything that begins with an m 
  
   why with an m said alice. 
  
   why not said the march hare. 
  
   alice was silent. 
  
   the dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going 
 off into a doze but, on being pinched by the hatter, it woke up 
 again with a little shriek, and went on  that begins with an 
 m, such as mousetraps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness 
 you know you say things are much of a muchnessdid you ever 
 see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness 
  
   really, now you ask me, said alice, very much confused, i 
 dont think 
  
   then you shouldnt talk, said the hatter. 
  
   this piece of rudeness was more than alice could bear  she got 
 up in great disgust, and walked off the dormouse fell asleep 
 instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her 
 going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that 
 they would call after her  the last time she saw them, they were 
 trying to put the dormouse into the teapot. 
  
   at any rate ill never go there again said alice as she 
 picked her way through the wood.  its the stupidest teaparty i 
 ever was at in all my life 
  
   just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a 
 door leading right into it.  thats very curious she thought. 
 but everythings curious today.  i think i may as well go in at 
 once.  and in she went. 
  
   once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the 
 little glass table.  now, ill manage better this time, she 
 said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and 
 unlocking the door that led into the garden.  then she went to 
 work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her 
 pocked) till she was about a foot high  then she walked down the 
 little passage  and thenshe found herself at last in the 
 beautiful garden, among the bright flowerbeds and the cool 
 fountains. 
  
  
  
                           chapter viii 
  
                    the queens croquetground 
  
  
   a large rosetree stood near the entrance of the garden  the 
 roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at 
 it, busily painting them red.  alice thought this a very curious 
 thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up 
 to them she heard one of them say, look out now, five  dont go 
 splashing paint over me like that 
  
   i couldnt help it, said five, in a sulky tone seven jogged 
 my elbow. 
  
   on which seven looked up and said, thats right, five  always 
 lay the blame on others 
  
   youd better not talk said five.  i heard the queen say only 
 yesterday you deserved to be beheaded 
  
   what for said the one who had spoken first. 
  
   thats none of your business, two said seven. 
  
   yes, it is his business said five, and ill tell himit 
 was for bringing the cook tuliproots instead of onions. 
  
   seven flung down his brush, and had just begun well, of all 
 the unjust things when his eye chanced to fall upon alice, as 
 she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly  the 
 others looked round also, and all of them bowed low. 
  
   would you tell me, said alice, a little timidly, why you are 
 painting those roses 
  
   five and seven said nothing, but looked at two.  two began in a 
 low voice, why the fact is, you see, miss, this here ought to 
 have been a red rosetree, and we put a white one in by mistake 
 and if the queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads 
 cut off, you know.  so you see, miss, were doing our best, afore 
 she comes, to  at this moment five, who had been anxiously 
 looking across the garden, called out the queen  the queen 
 and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon 
 their faces.  there was a sound of many footsteps, and alice 
 looked round, eager to see the queen. 
  
   first came ten soldiers carrying clubs these were all shaped 
 like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and 
 feet at the corners  next the ten courtiers these were 
 ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the 
 soldiers did.  after these came the royal children there were 
 ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand 
 in hand, in couples  they were all ornamented with hearts.  next 
 came the guests, mostly kings and queens, and among them alice 
 recognised the white rabbit  it was talking in a hurried nervous 
 manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without 
 noticing her.  then followed the knave of hearts, carrying the 
 kings crown on a crimson velvet cushion and, last of all this 
 grand procession, came the king and queen of hearts. 
  
   alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on 
 her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember 
 every having heard of such a rule at processions and besides, 
 what would be the use of a procession, thought she, if people 
 had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldnt see 
 it  so she stood still where she was, and waited. 
  
   when the procession came opposite to alice, they all stopped 
 and looked at her, and the queen said severely who is this 
 she said it to the knave of hearts, who only bowed and smiled in 
 reply. 
  
   idiot said the queen, tossing her head impatiently and, 
 turning to alice, she went on, whats your name, child 
  
   my name is alice, so please your majesty, said alice very 
 politely but she added, to herself, why, theyre only a pack of 
 cards, after all.  i neednt be afraid of them 
  
   and who are these said the queen, pointing to the three 
 gardeners who were lying round the rosetree for, you see, as 
 they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs 
 was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether 
 they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her 
 own children. 
  
   how should i know said alice, surprised at her own courage. 
 its no business of mine. 
  
   the queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her 
 for a moment like a wild beast, screamed off with her head 
 off 
  
   nonsense said alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the 
 queen was silent. 
  
   the king laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 
 consider, my dear  she is only a child 
  
   the queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the knave 
 turn them over 
  
   the knave did so, very carefully, with one foot. 
  
   get up said the queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the 
 three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the 
 king, the queen, the royal children, and everybody else. 
  
   leave off that screamed the queen.  you make me giddy. 
 and then, turning to the rosetree, she went on, what have you 
 been doing here 
  
   may it please your majesty, said two, in a very humble tone, 
 going down on one knee as he spoke, we were trying 
  
   i see said the queen, who had meanwhile been examining the 
 roses.  off with their heads and the procession moved on, 
 three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate 
 gardeners, who ran to alice for protection. 
  
   you shant be beheaded said alice, and she put them into a 
 large flowerpot that stood near.  the three soldiers wandered 
 about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly 
 marched off after the others. 
  
   are their heads off shouted the queen. 
  
   their heads are gone, if it please your majesty the soldiers 
 shouted in reply. 
  
   thats right shouted the queen.  can you play croquet 
  
   the soldiers were silent, and looked at alice, as the question 
 was evidently meant for her. 
  
   yes shouted alice. 
  
   come on, then roared the queen, and alice joined the 
 procession, wondering very much what would happen next. 
  
   itsits a very fine day said a timid voice at her side. 
 she was walking by the white rabbit, who was peeping anxiously 
 into her face. 
  
   very, said alice  wheres the duchess 
  
   hush  hush said the rabbit in a low, hurried tone.  he 
 looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised 
 himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and 
 whispered shes under sentence of execution. 
  
   what for said alice. 
  
   did you say what a pity the rabbit asked. 
  
   no, i didnt, said alice  i dont think its at all a pity. 
 i said what for 
  
   she boxed the queens ears the rabbit began.  alice gave a 
 little scream of laughter.  oh, hush the rabbit whispered in a 
 frightened tone.  the queen will hear you  you see, she came 
 rather late, and the queen said 
  
   get to your places shouted the queen in a voice of thunder, 
 and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up 
 against each other however, they got settled down in a minute or 
 two, and the game began.  alice thought she had never seen such a 
 curious croquetground in her life it was all ridges and 
 furrows the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live 
 flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to 
 stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches. 
  
   the chief difficulty alice found at first was in managing her 
 flamingo  she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, 
 comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, 
 but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened 
 out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it 
 would twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a 
 puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing 
 and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, 
 it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled 
 itself, and was in the act of crawling away  besides all this, 
 there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she 
 wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubledup soldiers 
 were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the 
 ground, alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very 
 difficult game indeed. 
  
   the players all played at once without waiting for turns, 
 quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs and in 
 a very short time the queen was in a furious passion, and went 
 stamping about, and shouting off with his head or off with 
 her head about once in a minute. 
  
   alice began to feel very uneasy  to be sure, she had not as 
 yet had any dispute with the queen, but she knew that it might 
 happen any minute, and then, thought she, what would become of 
 me  theyre dreadfully fond of beheading people here the great 
 wonder is, that theres any one left alive 
  
   she was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering 
 whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a 
 curious appearance in the air  it puzzled her very much at 
 first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to 
 be a grin, and she said to herself its the cheshire cat  now i 
 shall have somebody to talk to. 
  
   how are you getting on said the cat, as soon as there was 
 mouth enough for it to speak with. 
  
   alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.  its no 
 use speaking to it, she thought, till its ears have come, or at 
 least one of them.  in another minute the whole head appeared, 
 and then alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the 
 game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.  the 
 cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and 
 no more of it appeared. 
  
   i dont think they play at all fairly, alice began, in rather 
 a complaining tone, and they all quarrel so dreadfully one cant 
 hear oneself speakand they dont seem to have any rules in 
 particular at least, if there are, nobody attends to themand 
 youve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive 
 for instance, theres the arch ive got to go through next 
 walking about at the other end of the groundand i should have 
 croqueted the queens hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it 
 saw mine coming 
  
   how do you like the queen said the cat in a low voice. 
  
   not at all, said alice  shes so extremely  just then 
 she noticed that the queen was close behind her, listening  so 
 she went on, likely to win, that its hardly worth while 
 finishing the game. 
  
   the queen smiled and passed on. 
  
   who are you talking to said the king, going up to alice, and 
 looking at the cats head with great curiosity. 
  
   its a friend of minea cheshire cat, said alice  allow me 
 to introduce it. 
  
   i dont like the look of it at all, said the king  however, 
 it may kiss my hand if it likes. 
  
   id rather not, the cat remarked. 
  
   dont be impertinent, said the king, and dont look at me 
 like that  he got behind alice as he spoke. 
  
   a cat may look at a king, said alice.  ive read that in 
 some book, but i dont remember where. 
  
   well, it must be removed, said the king very decidedly, and 
 he called the queen, who was passing at the moment, my dear  i 
 wish you would have this cat removed 
  
   the queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great 
 or small.  off with his head she said, without even looking 
 round. 
  
   ill fetch the executioner myself, said the king eagerly, and 
 he hurried off. 
  
   alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game 
 was going on, as she heard the queens voice in the distance, 
 screaming with passion.  she had already heard her sentence three 
 of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and 
 she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in 
 such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or 
 not.  so she went in search of her hedgehog. 
  
   the hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, 
 which seemed to alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one 
 of them with the other  the only difficulty was, that her 
 flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where 
 alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up 
 into a tree. 
  
   by the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, 
 the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight 
 but it doesnt matter much, thought alice, as all the arches 
 are gone from this side of the ground.  so she tucked it away 
 under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for 
 a little more conversation with her friend. 
  
   when she got back to the cheshire cat, she was surprised to 
 find quite a large crowd collected round it  there was a dispute 
 going on between the executioner, the king, and the queen, who 
 were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, 
 and looked very uncomfortable. 
  
   the moment alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to 
 settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, 
 though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed 
 to make out exactly what they said. 
  
   the executioners argument was, that you couldnt cut off a 
 head unless there was a body to cut it off from  that he had 
 never had to do such a thing before, and he wasnt going to begin 
 at his time of life. 
  
   the kings argument was, that anything that had a head could be 
 beheaded, and that you werent to talk nonsense. 
  
   the queens argument was, that if something wasnt done about 
 it in less than no time shed have everybody executed, all round. 
 (it was this last remark that had made the whole party look so 
 grave and anxious.) 
  
   alice could think of nothing else to say but it belongs to the 
 duchess  youd better ask her about it. 
  
   shes in prison, the queen said to the executioner  fetch 
 her here.  and the executioner went off like an arrow. 
  
    the cats head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, 
 by the time he had come back with the dutchess, it had entirely 
 disappeared so the king and the executioner ran wildly up and 
 down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game. 
  
  
  
                            chapter ix 
  
                      the mock turtles story 
  
  
   you cant think how glad i am to see you again, you dear old 
 thing said the duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately 
 into alices, and they walked off together. 
  
   alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and 
 thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had 
 made her so savage when they met in the kitchen. 
  
   when im a duchess, she said to herself, (not in a very 
 hopeful tone though), i wont have any pepper in my kitchen at 
 all.  soup does very well withoutmaybe its always pepper that 
 makes people hottempered, she went on, very much pleased at 
 having found out a new kind of rule, and vinegar that makes them 
 sourand camomile that makes them bitterandand barleysugar 
 and such things that make children sweettempered.  i only wish 
 people knew that  then they wouldnt be so stingy about it, you 
 know 
  
   she had quite forgotten the duchess by this time, and was a 
 little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. 
 youre thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you 
 forget to talk.  i cant tell you just now what the moral of that 
 is, but i shall remember it in a bit. 
  
   perhaps it hasnt one, alice ventured to remark. 
  
   tut, tut, child said the duchess.  everythings got a 
 moral, if only you can find it.  and she squeezed herself up 
 closer to alices side as she spoke. 
  
   alice did not much like keeping so close to her  first, 
 because the duchess was very ugly and secondly, because she was 
 exactly the right height to rest her chin upon alices shoulder, 
 and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.  however, she did not 
 like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could. 
  
   the games going on rather better now, she said, by way of 
 keeping up the conversation a little. 
  
   tis so, said the duchess  and the moral of that isoh, 
 tis love, tis love, that makes the world go round 
  
   somebody said, alice whispered, that its done by everybody 
 minding their own business 
  
   ah, well  it means much the same thing, said the duchess, 
 digging her sharp little chin into alices shoulder as she added, 
 and the moral of that istake care of the sense, and the 
 sounds will take care of themselves. 
  
   how fond she is of finding morals in things alice thought to 
 herself. 
  
   i dare say youre wondering why i dont put my arm round your 
 waist, the duchess said after a pause  the reason is, that im 
 doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.  shall i try the 
 experiment 
  
   he might bite, alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all 
 anxious to have the experiment tried. 
  
   very true, said the duchess  flamingoes and mustard both 
 bite.  and the moral of that isbirds of a feather flock 
 together. 
  
   only mustard isnt a bird, alice remarked. 
  
   right, as usual, said the duchess  what a clear way you 
 have of putting things 
  
   its a mineral, i think, said alice. 
  
   of course it is, said the duchess, who seemed ready to agree 
 to everything that alice said theres a large mustardmine near 
 here.  and the moral of that isthe more there is of mine, the 
 less there is of yours. 
  
   oh, i know exclaimed alice, who had not attended to this 
 last remark, its a vegetable.  it doesnt look like one, but it 
 is. 
  
   i quite agree with you, said the duchess and the moral of 
 that isbe what you would seem to beor if youd like it put 
 more simplynever imagine yourself not to be otherwise than 
 what it might appear to others that what you were or might have 
 been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared 
 to them to be otherwise. 
  
   i think i should understand that better, alice said very 
 politely, if i had it written down  but i cant quite follow it 
 as you say it. 
  
   thats nothing to what i could say if i chose, the duchess 
 replied, in a pleased tone. 
  
   pray dont trouble yourself to say it any longer than that, 
 said alice. 
  
   oh, dont talk about trouble said the duchess.  i make you 
 a present of everything ive said as yet. 
  
   a cheap sort of present thought alice.  im glad they dont 
 give birthday presents like that  but she did not venture to 
 say it out loud. 
  
   thinking again the duchess asked, with another dig of her 
 sharp little chin. 
  
   ive a right to think, said alice sharply, for she was 
 beginning to feel a little worried. 
  
   just about as much right, said the duchess, as pigs have to 
 fly and the m 
  
   but here, to alices great surprise, the duchesss voice died 
 away, even in the middle of her favourite word moral, and the 
 arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.  alice looked up, 
 and there stood the queen in front of them, with her arms folded, 
 frowning like a thunderstorm. 
  
   a fine day, your majesty the duchess began in a low, weak 
 voice. 
  
   now, i give you fair warning, shouted the queen, stamping on 
 the ground as she spoke either you or your head must be off, 
 and that in about half no time  take your choice 
  
   the duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment. 
  
   lets go on with the game, the queen said to alice and alice 
 was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her 
 back to the croquetground. 
  
   the other guests had taken advantage of the queens absence, 
 and were resting in the shade  however, the moment they saw her, 
 they hurried back to the game, the queen merely remarking that a 
 moments delay would cost them their lives. 
  
   all the time they were playing the queen never left off 
 quarrelling with the other players, and shouting off with his 
 head or off with her head  those whom she sentenced were 
 taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave 
 off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour 
 or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the 
 king, the queen, and alice, were in custody and under sentence of 
 execution. 
  
   then the queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to 
 alice, have you seen the mock turtle yet 
  
   no, said alice.  i dont even know what a mock turtle is. 
  
   its the thing mock turtle soup is made from, said the queen. 
  
   i never saw one, or heard of one, said alice. 
  
   come on, then, said the queen, and he shall tell you his 
 history, 
  
   as they walked off together, alice heard the king say in a low 
 voice, to the company generally, you are all pardoned.  come, 
 thats a good thing she said to herself, for she had felt quite 
 unhappy at the number of executions the queen had ordered. 
  
   they very soon came upon a gryphon, lying fast asleep in the 
 sun.  (if you dont know what a gryphon is, look at the picture.) 
 up, lazy thing said the queen, and take this young lady to 
 see the mock turtle, and to hear his history.  i must go back and 
 see after some executions i have ordered and she walked off, 
 leaving alice alone with the gryphon.  alice did not quite like 
 the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would 
 be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage 
 queen  so she waited. 
  
   the gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes  then it watched the 
 queen till she was out of sight  then it chuckled.  what fun 
 said the gryphon, half to itself, half to alice. 
  
   what is the fun said alice. 
  
   why, she, said the gryphon.  its all her fancy, that  they 
 never executes nobody, you know.  come on 
  
   everybody says come on here, thought alice, as she went 
 slowly after it  i never was so ordered about in all my life, 
 never 
  
   they had not gone far before they saw the mock turtle in the 
 distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, 
 as they came nearer, alice could hear him sighing as if his heart 
 would break.  she pitied him deeply.  what is his sorrow she 
 asked the gryphon, and the gryphon answered, very nearly in the 
 same words as before, its all his fancy, that  he hasnt got 
 no sorrow, you know.  come on 
  
   so they went up to the mock turtle, who looked at them with 
 large eyes full of tears, but said nothing. 
  
   this here young lady, said the gryphon, she wants for to 
 know your history, she do. 
  
   ill tell it her, said the mock turtle in a deep, hollow 
 tone  sit down, both of you, and dont speak a word till ive 
 finished. 
  
   so they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.  alice 
 thought to herself, i dont see how he can even finish, if he 
 doesnt begin.  but she waited patiently. 
  
   once, said the mock turtle at last, with a deep sigh, i was 
 a real turtle. 
  
   these words were followed by a very long silence, broken only 
 by an occasional exclamation of hjckrrh from the gryphon, and 
 the constant heavy sobbing of the mock turtle.  alice was very 
 nearly getting up and saying, thank you, sir, for your 
 interesting story, but she could not help thinking there must be 
 more to come, so she sat still and said nothing. 
  
   when we were little, the mock turtle went on at last, more 
 calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, we went to 
 school in the sea.  the master was an old turtlewe used to call 
 him tortoise 
  
   why did you call him tortoise, if he wasnt one alice asked. 
  
   we called him tortoise because he taught us, said the mock 
 turtle angrily  really you are very dull 
  
   you ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple 
 question, added the gryphon and then they both sat silent and 
 looked at poor alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.  at 
 last the gryphon said to the mock turtle, drive on, old fellow 
 dont be all day about it and he went on in these words 
  
   yes, we went to school in the sea, though you maynt believe 
 it 
  
   i never said i didnt interrupted alice. 
  
   you did, said the mock turtle. 
  
   hold your tongue added the gryphon, before alice could speak 
 again.  the mock turtle went on. 
  
   we had the best of educationsin fact, we went to school 
 every day 
  
   ive been to a dayschool, too, said alice you neednt be 
 so proud as all that. 
  
   with extras asked the mock turtle a little anxiously. 
  
   yes, said alice, we learned french and music. 
  
   and washing said the mock turtle. 
  
   certainly not said alice indignantly. 
  
   ah then yours wasnt a really good school, said the mock 
 turtle in a tone of great relief.  now at ours they had at the 
 end of the bill, french, music, and washingextra. 
  
   you couldnt have wanted it much, said alice living at the 
 bottom of the sea. 
  
   i couldnt afford to learn it. said the mock turtle with a 
 sigh.  i only took the regular course. 
  
   what was that inquired alice. 
  
   reeling and writhing, of course, to begin with, the mock 
 turtle replied and then the different branches of arithmetic 
 ambition, distraction, uglification, and derision. 
  
   i never heard of uglification, alice ventured to say.  what 
 is it 
  
   the gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.  what  never 
 heard of uglifying it exclaimed.  you know what to beautify 
 is, i suppose 
  
   yes, said alice doubtfully  it meanstomakeanything 
 prettier. 
  
   well, then, the gryphon went on, if you dont know what to 
 uglify is, you are a simpleton. 
  
   alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about 
 it, so she turned to the mock turtle, and said what else had you 
 to learn 
  
   well, there was mystery, the mock turtle replied, counting 
 off the subjects on his flappers, mystery, ancient and modern, 
 with seaography  then drawlingthe drawlingmaster was an old 
 congereel, that used to come once a week  he taught us 
 drawling, stretching, and fainting in coils. 
  
   what was that like said alice. 
  
   well, i cant show it you myself, the mock turtle said  im 
 too stiff.  and the gryphon never learnt it. 
  
   hadnt time, said the gryphon  i went to the classics 
 master, though.  he was an old crab, he was. 
  
   i never went to him, the mock turtle said with a sigh  he 
 taught laughing and grief, they used to say. 
  
   so he did, so he did, said the gryphon, sighing in his turn 
 and both creatures hid their faces in their paws. 
  
   and how many hours a day did you do lessons said alice, in a 
 hurry to change the subject. 
  
   ten hours the first day, said the mock turtle nine the 
 next, and so on. 
  
   what a curious plan exclaimed alice. 
  
   thats the reason theyre called lessons, the gryphon 
 remarked  because they lessen from day to day. 
  
   this was quite a new idea to alice, and she thought it over a 
 little before she made her next remark.  then the eleventh day 
 must have been a holiday 
  
   of course it was, said the mock turtle. 
  
   and how did you manage on the twelfth alice went on eagerly. 
  
   thats enough about lessons, the gryphon interrupted in a 
 very decided tone  tell her something about the games now. 
  
  
  
                             chapter x 
  
                       the lobster quadrille 
  
  
   the mock turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper 
 across his eyes.  he looked at alice, and tried to speak, but for 
 a minute or two sobs choked his voice.  same as if he had a bone 
 in his throat, said the gryphon  and it set to work shaking him 
 and punching him in the back.  at last the mock turtle recovered 
 his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on 
 again 
  
   you may not have lived much under the sea (i havent, 
 said alice)and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster 
 (alice began to say i once tasted but checked herself hastily, 
 and said no, never) so you can have no idea what a delightful 
 thing a lobster quadrille is 
  
   no, indeed, said alice.  what sort of a dance is it 
  
   why, said the gryphon, you first form into a line along the 
 seashore 
  
   two lines cried the mock turtle.  seals, turtles, salmon, 
 and so on then, when youve cleared all the jellyfish out of 
 the way 
  
   that generally takes some time, interrupted the gryphon. 
  
   you advance twice 
  
   each with a lobster as a partner cried the gryphon. 
  
   of course, the mock turtle said  advance twice, set to 
 partners 
  
   change lobsters, and retire in same order, continued the 
 gryphon. 
  
   then, you know, the mock turtle went on, you throw the 
  
   the lobsters shouted the gryphon, with a bound into the air. 
  
   as far out to sea as you can 
  
   swim after them screamed the gryphon. 
  
   turn a somersault in the sea cried the mock turtle, 
 capering wildly about. 
  
   back to land again, and thats all the first figure, said the 
 mock turtle, suddenly dropping his voice and the two creatures, 
 who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat 
 down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at alice. 
  
   it must be a very pretty dance, said alice timidly. 
  
   would you like to see a little of it said the mock turtle. 
  
   very much indeed, said alice. 
  
   come, lets try the first figure said the mock turtle to the 
 gryphon.  we can do without lobsters, you know.  which shall 
 sing 
  
   oh, you sing, said the gryphon.  ive forgotten the words. 
  
   so they began solemnly dancing round and round alice, every now 
 and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and 
 waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the mock turtle 
 sang this, very slowly and sadly 
  
  
 will you walk a little faster said a whiting to a snail. 
 theres a porpoise close behind us, and hes treading on my 
  tail. 
 see how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance 
 they are waiting on the shinglewill you come and join the 
 dance 
  
 will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the 
 dance 
 will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the 
 dance 
  
  
 you can really have no notion how delightful it will be 
 when they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to 
                                                       sea 
 but the snail replied too far, too far and gave a look 
                                                        askance 
 said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the 
    dance. 
     would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join 
         the dance. 
     would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join 
         the dance. 
  
 what matters it how far we go his scaly friend replied. 
 there is another shore, you know, upon the other side. 
 the further off from england the nearer is to france 
 then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance. 
  
     will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the 
          dance 
     will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the 
          dance 
  
  
  
   thank you, its a very interesting dance to watch, said 
 alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last  and i do so 
 like that curious song about the whiting 
  
   oh, as to the whiting, said the mock turtle, theyyouve 
 seen them, of course 
  
   yes, said alice, ive often seen them at dinn she 
 checked herself hastily. 
  
   i dont know where dinn may be, said the mock turtle, but 
 if youve seen them so often, of course you know what theyre 
 like. 
  
   i believe so, alice replied thoughtfully.  they have their 
 tails in their mouthsand theyre all over crumbs. 
  
   youre wrong about the crumbs, said the mock turtle 
 crumbs would all wash off in the sea.  but they have their tails 
 in their mouths and the reason is here the mock turtle 
 yawned and shut his eyes.tell her about the reason and all 
 that, he said to the gryphon. 
  
   the reason is, said the gryphon, that they would go with 
 the lobsters to the dance.  so they got thrown out to sea.  so 
 they had to fall a long way.  so they got their tails fast in 
 their mouths.  so they couldnt get them out again.  thats all. 
  
   thank you, said alice, its very interesting.  i never knew 
 so much about a whiting before. 
  
   i can tell you more than that, if you like, said the 
 gryphon.  do you know why its called a whiting 
  
   i never thought about it, said alice.  why 
  
   it does the boots and shoes. the gryphon replied very 
 solemnly. 
  
   alice was thoroughly puzzled.  does the boots and shoes she 
 repeated in a wondering tone. 
  
   why, what are your shoes done with said the gryphon.  i 
 mean, what makes them so shiny 
  
   alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she 
 gave her answer.  theyre done with blacking, i believe. 
  
   boots and shoes under the sea, the gryphon went on in a deep 
 voice, are done with a whiting.  now you know. 
  
   and what are they made of alice asked in a tone of great 
 curiosity. 
  
   soles and eels, of course, the gryphon replied rather 
 impatiently  any shrimp could have told you that. 
  
   if id been the whiting, said alice, whose thoughts were 
 still running on the song, id have said to the porpoise, keep 
 back, please  we dont want you with us 
  
   they were obliged to have him with them, the mock turtle 
 said  no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise. 
  
   wouldnt it really said alice in a tone of great surprise. 
  
   of course not, said the mock turtle  why, if a fish came 
 to me, and told me he was going a journey, i should say with 
 what porpoise 
  
   dont you mean purpose said alice. 
  
   i mean what i say, the mock turtle replied in an offended 
 tone.  and the gryphon added come, lets hear some of your 
 adventures. 
  
   i could tell you my adventuresbeginning from this morning, 
 said alice a little timidly  but its no use going back to 
 yesterday, because i was a different person then. 
  
   explain all that, said the mock turtle. 
  
   no, no  the adventures first, said the gryphon in an 
 impatient tone  explanations take such a dreadful time. 
  
   so alice began telling them her adventures from the time when 
 she first saw the white rabbit.  she was a little nervous about 
 it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on 
 each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so very wide, but she 
 gained courage as she went on.  her listeners were perfectly 
 quiet till she got to the part about her repeating you are old, 
 father william, to the caterpillar, and the words all coming 
 different, and then the mock turtle drew a long breath, and said 
 thats very curious. 
  
   its all about as curious as it can be, said the gryphon. 
  
   it all came different the mock turtle repeated 
 thoughtfully.  i should like to hear her try and repeat 
 something now.  tell her to begin.  he looked at the gryphon as 
 if he thought it had some kind of authority over alice. 
  
   stand up and repeat tis the voice of the sluggard, said 
 the gryphon. 
  
   how the creatures order one about, and make one repeat 
 lessons thought alice i might as well be at school at once. 
 however, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so 
 full of the lobster quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was 
 saying, and the words came very queer indeed 
  
     tis the voice of the lobster i heard him declare, 
     you have baked me too brown, i must sugar my hair. 
     as a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose 
     trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes. 
  
               later editions continued as follows 
     when the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark, 
     and will talk in contemptuous tones of the shark, 
     but, when the tide rises and sharks are around, 
     his voice has a timid and tremulous sound. 
  
   thats different from what i used to say when i was a child, 
 said the gryphon. 
  
   well, i never heard it before, said the mock turtle but it 
 sounds uncommon nonsense. 
  
   alice said nothing she had sat down with her face in her 
 hands, wondering if anything would ever happen in a natural way 
 again. 
  
   i should like to have it explained, said the mock turtle. 
  
   she cant explain it, said the gryphon hastily.  go on with 
 the next verse. 
  
   but about his toes the mock turtle persisted.  how could 
 he turn them out with his nose, you know 
  
   its the first position in dancing. alice said but was 
 dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the 
 subject. 
  
   go on with the next verse, the gryphon repeated impatiently 
 it begins i passed by his garden. 
  
   alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would 
 all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice 
  
     i passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye, 
     how the owl and the panther were sharing a pie 
  
         later editions continued as follows 
     the panther took piecrust, and gravy, and meat, 
     while the owl had the dish as its share of the treat. 
     when the pie was all finished, the owl, as a boon, 
     was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon 
     while the panther received knife and fork with a growl, 
     and concluded the banquet 
  
   what is the use of repeating all that stuff, the mock turtle 
 interrupted, if you dont explain it as you go on  its by far 
 the most confusing thing i ever heard 
  
   yes, i think youd better leave off, said the gryphon  and 
 alice was only too glad to do so. 
  
   shall we try another figure of the lobster quadrille the 
 gryphon went on.  or would you like the mock turtle to sing you 
 a song 
  
   oh, a song, please, if the mock turtle would be so kind, 
 alice replied, so eagerly that the gryphon said, in a rather 
 offended tone, hm no accounting for tastes  sing her turtle 
 soup, will you, old fellow 
  
   the mock turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes 
 choked with sobs, to sing this 
  
  
     beautiful soup, so rich and green, 
     waiting in a hot tureen 
     who for such dainties would not stoop 
     soup of the evening, beautiful soup 
     soup of the evening, beautiful soup 
         beauootiful soooop 
         beauootiful soooop 
     soooop of the eeevening, 
         beautiful, beautiful soup 
  
     beautiful soup  who cares for fish, 
     game, or any other dish 
     who would not give all else for two p 
     ennyworth only of beautiful soup 
     pennyworth only of beautiful soup 
         beauootiful soooop 
         beauootiful soooop 
     soooop of the eeevening, 
         beautiful, beautiful soup 
  
   chorus again cried the gryphon, and the mock turtle had 
 just begun to repeat it, when a cry of the trials beginning 
 was heard in the distance. 
  
   come on cried the gryphon, and, taking alice by the hand, 
 it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song. 
  
   what trial is it alice panted as she ran but the gryphon 
 only answered come on and ran the faster, while more and more 
 faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the 
 melancholy words 
  
     soooop of the eeevening, 
         beautiful, beautiful soup 
  
  
  
                            chapter xi 
  
                       who stole the tarts 
  
  
   the king and queen of hearts were seated on their throne when 
 they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about themall sorts 
 of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards 
 the knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on 
 each side to guard him and near the king was the white rabbit, 
 with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the 
 other.  in the very middle of the court was a table, with a large 
 dish of tarts upon it  they looked so good, that it made alice 
 quite hungry to look at themi wish theyd get the trial done, 
 she thought, and hand round the refreshments  but there seemed 
 to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about 
 her, to pass away the time. 
  
   alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had 
 read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that 
 she knew the name of nearly everything there.  thats the 
 judge, she said to herself, because of his great wig. 
  
   the judge, by the way, was the king and as he wore his crown 
 over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he 
 did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly 
 not becoming. 
  
   and thats the jurybox, thought alice, and those twelve 
 creatures, (she was obliged to say creatures, you see, because 
 some of them were animals, and some were birds,) i suppose they 
 are the jurors.  she said this last word two or three times over 
 to herself, being rather proud of it  for she thought, and 
 rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the 
 meaning of it at all.  however, jurymen would have done just 
 as well. 
  
   the twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. 
 what are they doing  alice whispered to the gryphon.  they 
 cant have anything to put down yet, before the trials begun. 
  
   theyre putting down their names, the gryphon whispered in 
 reply, for fear they should forget them before the end of the 
 trial. 
  
   stupid things alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but 
 she stopped hastily, for the white rabbit cried out, silence in 
 the court and the king put on his spectacles and looked 
 anxiously round, to make out who was talking. 
  
   alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their 
 shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down stupid things 
 on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them 
 didnt know how to spell stupid, and that he had to ask his 
 neighbour to tell him.  a nice muddle their slatesll be in 
 before the trials over thought alice. 
  
   one of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.  this of course, 
 alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got 
 behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it 
 away.  she did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was 
 bill, the lizard) could not make out at all what had become of 
 it so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write 
 with one finger for the rest of the day and this was of very 
 little use, as it left no mark on the slate. 
  
   herald, read the accusation said the king. 
  
   on this the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and 
 then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows 
  
     the queen of hearts, she made some tarts, 
           all on a summer day 
       the knave of hearts, he stole those tarts, 
           and took them quite away 
  
   consider your verdict, the king said to the jury. 
  
   not yet, not yet the rabbit hastily interrupted.  theres 
 a great deal to come before that 
  
   call the first witness, said the king and the white rabbit 
 blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, first 
 witness 
  
   the first witness was the hatter.  he came in with a teacup in 
 one hand and a piece of breadandbutter in the other.  i beg 
 pardon, your majesty, he began, for bringing these in  but i 
 hadnt quite finished my tea when i was sent for. 
  
   you ought to have finished, said the king.  when did you 
 begin 
  
   the hatter looked at the march hare, who had followed him into 
 the court, arminarm with the dormouse.  fourteenth of march, i 
 think it was, he said. 
  
   fifteenth, said the march hare. 
  
   sixteenth, added the dormouse. 
  
   write that down, the king said to the jury, and the jury 
 eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then 
 added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence. 
  
   take off your hat, the king said to the hatter. 
  
   it isnt mine, said the hatter. 
  
   stolen the king exclaimed, turning to the jury, who 
 instantly made a memorandum of the fact. 
  
   i keep them to sell, the hatter added as an explanation 
 ive none of my own.  im a hatter. 
  
   here the queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the 
 hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted. 
  
   give your evidence, said the king and dont be nervous, or 
 ill have you executed on the spot. 
  
   this did not seem to encourage the witness at all  he kept 
 shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the 
 queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his 
 teacup instead of the breadandbutter. 
  
   just at this moment alice felt a very curious sensation, which 
 puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was  she was 
 beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she 
 would get up and leave the court but on second thoughts she 
 decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for 
 her. 
  
   i wish you wouldnt squeeze so. said the dormouse, who was 
 sitting next to her.  i can hardly breathe. 
  
   i cant help it, said alice very meekly  im growing. 
  
   youve no right to grow here, said the dormouse. 
  
   dont talk nonsense, said alice more boldly  you know 
 youre growing too. 
  
   yes, but i grow at a reasonable pace, said the dormouse 
 not in that ridiculous fashion.  and he got up very sulkily 
 and crossed over to the other side of the court. 
  
   all this time the queen had never left off staring at the 
 hatter, and, just as the dormouse crossed the court, she said to 
 one of the officers of the court, bring me the list of the 
 singers in the last concert on which the wretched hatter 
 trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off. 
  
   give your evidence, the king repeated angrily, or ill have 
 you executed, whether youre nervous or not. 
  
   im a poor man, your majesty, the hatter began, in a 
 trembling voice, and i hadnt begun my teanot above a week 
 or soand what with the breadandbutter getting so thinand 
 the twinkling of the tea 
  
   the twinkling of the what said the king. 
  
   it began with the tea, the hatter replied. 
  
   of course twinkling begins with a t said the king sharply. 
 do you take me for a dunce  go on 
  
   im a poor man, the hatter went on, and most things 
 twinkled after thatonly the march hare said 
  
   i didnt the march hare interrupted in a great hurry. 
  
   you did said the hatter. 
  
   i deny it said the march hare. 
  
   he denies it, said the king  leave out that part. 
  
   well, at any rate, the dormouse said the hatter went on, 
 looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too  but the 
 dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep. 
  
   after that, continued the hatter, i cut some more bread 
 andbutter 
  
   but what did the dormouse say one of the jury asked. 
  
   that i cant remember, said the hatter. 
  
   you must remember, remarked the king, or ill have you 
 executed. 
  
   the miserable hatter dropped his teacup and breadandbutter, 
 and went down on one knee.  im a poor man, your majesty, he 
 began. 
  
   youre a very poor speaker, said the king. 
  
   here one of the guineapigs cheered, and was immediately 
 suppressed by the officers of the court.  (as that is rather a 
 hard word, i will just explain to you how it was done.  they had 
 a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings 
 into this they slipped the guineapig, head first, and then sat 
 upon it.) 
  
   im glad ive seen that done, thought alice.  ive so often 
 read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, there was some 
 attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the 
 officers of the court, and i never understood what it meant 
 till now. 
  
   if thats all you know about it, you may stand down, 
 continued the king. 
  
   i cant go no lower, said the hatter  im on the floor, as 
 it is. 
  
   then you may sit down, the king replied. 
  
   here the other guineapig cheered, and was suppressed. 
  
   come, that finished the guineapigs thought alice.  now we 
 shall get on better. 
  
   id rather finish my tea, said the hatter, with an anxious 
 look at the queen, who was reading the list of singers. 
  
   you may go, said the king, and the hatter hurriedly left the 
 court, without even waiting to put his shoes on. 
  
   and just take his head off outside, the queen added to one 
 of the officers  but the hatter was out of sight before the 
 officer could get to the door. 
  
   call the next witness said the king. 
  
   the next witness was the duchesss cook.  she carried the 
 pepperbox in her hand, and alice guessed who it was, even before 
 she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began 
 sneezing all at once. 
  
   give your evidence, said the king. 
  
   shant, said the cook. 
  
   the king looked anxiously at the white rabbit, who said in a 
 low voice, your majesty must crossexamine this witness. 
  
   well, if i must, i must, the king said, with a melancholy 
 air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till 
 his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, what 
 are tarts made of 
  
   pepper, mostly, said the cook. 
  
   treacle, said a sleepy voice behind her. 
  
   collar that dormouse, the queen shrieked out.  behead that 
 dormouse  turn that dormouse out of court  suppress him  pinch 
 him  off with his whiskers 
  
   for some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the 
 dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down 
 again, the cook had disappeared. 
  
   never mind said the king, with an air of great relief. 
 call the next witness.  and he added in an undertone to the 
 queen, really, my dear, you must crossexamine the next witness. 
 it quite makes my forehead ache 
  
   alice watched the white rabbit as he fumbled over the list, 
 feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like, 
 for they havent got much evidence yet, she said to herself. 
 imagine her surprise, when the white rabbit read out, at the top 
 of his shrill little voice, the name alice 
  
  
  
                            chapter xii 
  
                         alices evidence 
  
  
   here cried alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the 
 moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she 
 jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jurybox with 
 the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads 
 of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding 
 her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset 
 the week before. 
  
   oh, i beg your pardon she exclaimed in a tone of great 
 dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, 
 for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and 
 she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once 
 and put back into the jurybox, or they would die. 
  
   the trial cannot proceed, said the king in a very grave 
 voice, until all the jurymen are back in their proper places 
 all, he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at alice as 
 he said do. 
  
   alice looked at the jurybox, and saw that, in her haste, she 
 had put the lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing 
 was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable 
 to move.  she soon got it out again, and put it right not that 
 it signifies much, she said to herself i should think it 
 would be quite as much use in the trial one way up as the other. 
  
   as soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of 
 being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and 
 handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write 
 out a history of the accident, all except the lizard, who seemed 
 too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, 
 gazing up into the roof of the court. 
  
   what do you know about this business the king said to 
 alice. 
  
   nothing, said alice. 
  
   nothing whatever persisted the king. 
  
   nothing whatever, said alice. 
  
   thats very important, the king said, turning to the jury. 
 they were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when 
 the white rabbit interrupted  unimportant, your majesty means, 
 of course, he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and 
 making faces at him as he spoke. 
  
   unimportant, of course, i meant, the king hastily said, and 
 went on to himself in an undertone, importantunimportant 
 unimportantimportant as if he were trying which word 
 sounded best. 
  
   some of the jury wrote it down important, and some 
 unimportant.  alice could see this, as she was near enough to 
 look over their slates but it doesnt matter a bit, she 
 thought to herself. 
  
   at this moment the king, who had been for some time busily 
 writing in his notebook, cackled out silence and read out 
 from his book, rule fortytwo.  all persons more than a mile 
 high to leave the court. 
  
   everybody looked at alice. 
  
   im not a mile high, said alice. 
  
   you are, said the king. 
  
   nearly two miles high, added the queen. 
  
   well, i shant go, at any rate, said alice  besides, 
 thats not a regular rule  you invented it just now. 
  
   its the oldest rule in the book, said the king. 
  
   then it ought to be number one, said alice. 
  
   the king turned pale, and shut his notebook hastily. 
 consider your verdict, he said to the jury, in a low, trembling 
 voice. 
  
   theres more evidence to come yet, please your majesty, said 
 the white rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry this paper has 
 just been picked up. 
  
   whats in it said the queen. 
  
   i havent opened it yet, said the white rabbit, but it seems 
 to be a letter, written by the prisoner toto somebody. 
  
   it must have been that, said the king, unless it was 
 written to nobody, which isnt usual, you know. 
  
   who is it directed to said one of the jurymen. 
  
   it isnt directed at all, said the white rabbit in fact, 
 theres nothing written on the outside.  he unfolded the paper 
 as he spoke, and added it isnt a letter, after all  its a set 
 of verses. 
  
   are they in the prisoners handwriting asked another of 
 they jurymen. 
  
   no, theyre not, said the white rabbit, and thats the 
 queerest thing about it.  (the jury all looked puzzled.) 
  
   he must have imitated somebody elses hand, said the king. 
 (the jury all brightened up again.) 
  
   please your majesty, said the knave, i didnt write it, and 
 they cant prove i did  theres no name signed at the end. 
  
   if you didnt sign it, said the king, that only makes the 
 matter worse.  you must have meant some mischief, or else youd 
 have signed your name like an honest man. 
  
   there was a general clapping of hands at this  it was the 
 first really clever thing the king had said that day. 
  
   that proves his guilt, said the queen. 
  
   it proves nothing of the sort said alice.  why, you dont 
 even know what theyre about 
  
   read them, said the king. 
  
   the white rabbit put on his spectacles.  where shall i begin, 
 please your majesty he asked. 
  
   begin at the beginning, the king said gravely, and go on 
 till you come to the end  then stop. 
  
   these were the verses the white rabbit read 
  
         they told me you had been to her, 
           and mentioned me to him 
         she gave me a good character, 
           but said i could not swim. 
  
         he sent them word i had not gone 
           (we know it to be true) 
         if she should push the matter on, 
           what would become of you 
  
         i gave her one, they gave him two, 
           you gave us three or more 
         they all returned from him to you, 
           though they were mine before. 
  
         if i or she should chance to be 
           involved in this affair, 
         he trusts to you to set them free, 
           exactly as we were. 
  
         my notion was that you had been 
           (before she had this fit) 
         an obstacle that came between 
           him, and ourselves, and it. 
  
         dont let him know she liked them best, 
           for this must ever be 
         a secret, kept from all the rest, 
           between yourself and me. 
  
   thats the most important piece of evidence weve heard yet, 
 said the king, rubbing his hands so now let the jury 
  
   if any one of them can explain it, said alice, (she had 
 grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasnt a bit 
 afraid of interrupting him,) ill give him sixpence.  i dont 
 believe theres an atom of meaning in it. 
  
   the jury all wrote down on their slates, she doesnt believe 
 theres an atom of meaning in it, but none of them attempted to 
 explain the paper. 
  
   if theres no meaning in it, said the king, that saves a 
 world of trouble, you know, as we neednt try to find any.  and 
 yet i dont know, he went on, spreading out the verses on his 
 knee, and looking at them with one eye i seem to see some 
 meaning in them, after all.  said i could not swim you 
 cant swim, can you he added, turning to the knave. 
  
   the knave shook his head sadly.  do i look like it he said. 
 (which he certainly did not, being made entirely of cardboard.) 
  
   all right, so far, said the king, and he went on muttering 
 over the verses to himself  we know it to be true thats 
 the jury, of course i gave her one, they gave him two why, 
 that must be what he did with the tarts, you know 
  
   but, it goes on they all returned from him to you, said 
 alice. 
  
   why, there they are said the king triumphantly, pointing to 
 the tarts on the table.  nothing can be clearer than that. 
 then againbefore she had this fit  you never had fits, my 
 dear, i think he said to the queen. 
  
   never said the queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the 
 lizard as she spoke.  (the unfortunate little bill had left off 
 writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no 
 mark but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was 
 trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.) 
  
   then the words dont fit you, said the king, looking round 
 the court with a smile.  there was a dead silence. 
  
   its a pun the king added in an offended tone, and 
 everybody laughed, let the jury consider their verdict, the 
 king said, for about the twentieth time that day. 
  
   no, no said the queen.  sentence firstverdict afterwards. 
  
   stuff and nonsense said alice loudly.  the idea of having 
 the sentence first 
  
   hold your tongue said the queen, turning purple. 
  
   i wont said alice. 
  
   off with her head the queen shouted at the top of her voice. 
 nobody moved. 
  
   who cares for you said alice, (she had grown to her full 
 size by this time.)  youre nothing but a pack of cards 
  
   at this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying 
 down upon her  she gave a little scream, half of fright and half 
 of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on 
 the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently 
 brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the 
 trees upon her face. 
  
   wake up, alice dear said her sister why, what a long 
 sleep youve had 
  
   oh, ive had such a curious dream said alice, and she told 
 her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange 
 adventures of hers that you have just been reading about and 
 when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, it was a 
 curious dream, dear, certainly  but now run in to your tea its 
 getting late.  so alice got up and ran off, thinking while she 
 ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been. 
  
   but her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her 
 head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of 
 little alice and all her wonderful adventures, till she too began 
 dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream 
  
   first, she dreamed of little alice herself, and once again the 
 tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes 
 were looking up into hersshe could hear the very tones of her 
 voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back 
 the wandering hair that would always get into her eyesand 
 still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place 
 around her became alive the strange creatures of her little 
 sisters dream. 
  
   the long grass rustled at her feet as the white rabbit hurried 
 bythe frightened mouse splashed his way through the 
 neighbouring poolshe could hear the rattle of the teacups as 
 the march hare and his friends shared their neverending meal, 
 and the shrill voice of the queen ordering off her unfortunate 
 guests to executiononce more the pigbaby was sneezing on the 
 duchesss knee, while plates and dishes crashed around itonce 
 more the shriek of the gryphon, the squeaking of the lizards 
 slatepencil, and the choking of the suppressed guineapigs, 
 filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable 
 mock turtle. 
  
   so she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in 
 wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and 
 all would change to dull realitythe grass would be only 
 rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the 
 reedsthe rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep 
 bells, and the queens shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd 
 boyand the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the gryphon, and 
 all thy other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the 
 confused clamour of the busy farmyardwhile the lowing of the 
 cattle in the distance would take the place of the mock turtles 
 heavy sobs. 
  
   lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of 
 hers would, in the aftertime, be herself a grown woman and how 
 she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and 
 loving heart of her childhood  and how she would gather about 
 her other little children, and make their eyes bright and eager 
 with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of 
 wonderland of long ago  and how she would feel with all their 
 simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, 
 remembering her own childlife, and the happy summer days. 
  
                              the end 
  
 
B
as you like it 
  
  
 dramatis personae 
  
  
 duke seniorliving in banishment. 
  
 duke frederickhis brother, an usurper of his dominions. 
  
  
 amiens 
   lords attending on the banished duke. 
 jaques 
  
  
 le beaua courtier attending upon frederick. 
  
 charleswrestler to frederick. 
  
  
 oliver 
  
 jaques (jaques de boys)    sons of sir rowland de boys. 
  
 orlando 
  
  
 adam 
   servants to oliver. 
 dennis 
  
  
 touchstonea clown. 
  
 sir oliver martexta vicar. 
  
  
 corin 
   shepherds. 
 silvius 
  
  
 williama country fellow in love with audrey. 
  
 a person representing hymen. (hymen) 
  
 rosalinddaughter to the banished duke. 
  
 celiadaughter to frederick. 
  
 phebea shepherdess. 
  
 audreya country wench. 
  
 lords, pages, and attendants, c. 
 (forester) 
 (a lord) 
 (first lord) 
 (second lord) 
 (first page) 
 (second page) 
  
  
 sceneolivers house duke fredericks court and the 
 forest of arden. 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act i 
  
  
  
 scene iorchard of olivers house. 
  
  
 enter orlando and adam 
  
 orlandoas i remember, adam, it was upon this fashion 
 bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns, 
 and, as thou sayest, charged my brother, on his 
 blessing, to breed me well and there begins my 
 sadness. my brother jaques he keeps at school, and 
 report speaks goldenly of his profit for my part, 
 he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more 
 properly, stays me here at home unkept for call you 
 that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that 
 differs not from the stalling of an ox his horses 
 are bred better for, besides that they are fair 
 with their feeding, they are taught their manage, 
 and to that end riders dearly hired but i, his 
 brother, gain nothing under him but growth for the 
 which his animals on his dunghills are as much 
 bound to him as i. besides this nothing that he so 
 plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave 
 me his countenance seems to take from me he lets 
 me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a 
 brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my 
 gentility with my education. this is it, adam, that 
 grieves me and the spirit of my father, which i 
 think is within me, begins to mutiny against this 
 servitude i will no longer endure it, though yet i 
 know no wise remedy how to avoid it. 
  
 adamyonder comes my master, your brother. 
  
 orlandogo apart, adam, and thou shalt hear how he will 
 shake me up. 
  
 enter oliver 
  
 olivernow, sir what make you here 
  
 orlandonothing i am not taught to make any thing. 
  
 oliverwhat mar you then, sir 
  
 orlandomarry, sir, i am helping you to mar that which god 
 made, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness. 
  
 olivermarry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile. 
  
 orlandoshall i keep your hogs and eat husks with them 
 what prodigal portion have i spent, that i should 
 come to such penury 
  
 oliverknow you where your are, sir 
  
 orlandoo, sir, very well here in your orchard. 
  
 oliverknow you before whom, sir 
  
 orlandoay, better than him i am before knows me. i know 
 you are my eldest brother and, in the gentle 
 condition of blood, you should so know me. the 
 courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that 
 you are the firstborn but the same tradition 
 takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers 
 betwixt us i have as much of my father in me as 
 you albeit, i confess, your coming before me is 
 nearer to his reverence. 
  
 oliverwhat, boy 
  
 orlandocome, come, elder brother, you are too young in this. 
  
 oliverwilt thou lay hands on me, villain 
  
 orlandoi am no villain i am the youngest son of sir 
 rowland de boys he was my father, and he is thrice 
 a villain that says such a father begot villains. 
 wert thou not my brother, i would not take this hand 
 from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy 
 tongue for saying so thou hast railed on thyself. 
  
 adamsweet masters, be patient for your fathers 
 remembrance, be at accord. 
  
 oliverlet me go, i say. 
  
 orlandoi will not, till i please you shall hear me. my 
 father charged you in his will to give me good 
 education you have trained me like a peasant, 
 obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike 
 qualities. the spirit of my father grows strong in 
 me, and i will no longer endure it therefore allow 
 me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or 
 give me the poor allottery my father left me by 
 testament with that i will go buy my fortunes. 
  
 oliverand what wilt thou do beg, when that is spent 
 well, sir, get you in i will not long be troubled 
 with you you shall have some part of your will i 
 pray you, leave me. 
  
 orlandoi will no further offend you than becomes me for my good. 
  
 oliverget you with him, you old dog. 
  
 adamis old dog my reward most true, i have lost my 
 teeth in your service. god be with my old master 
 he would not have spoke such a word. 
  
 exeunt orlando and adam 
  
 oliveris it even so begin you to grow upon me i will 
 physic your rankness, and yet give no thousand 
 crowns neither. holla, dennis 
  
 enter dennis 
  
 denniscalls your worship 
  
 oliverwas not charles, the dukes wrestler, here to speak with me 
  
 dennisso please you, he is here at the door and importunes 
 access to you. 
  
 olivercall him in. 
  
 exit dennis 
  
 twill be a good way and tomorrow the wrestling is. 
  
 enter charles 
  
 charlesgood morrow to your worship. 
  
 olivergood monsieur charles, whats the new news at the 
 new court 
  
 charlestheres no news at the court, sir, but the old news 
 that is, the old duke is banished by his younger 
 brother the new duke and three or four loving lords 
 have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, 
 whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke 
 therefore he gives them good leave to wander. 
  
 olivercan you tell if rosalind, the dukes daughter, be 
 banished with her father 
  
 charleso, no for the dukes daughter, her cousin, so loves 
 her, being ever from their cradles bred together, 
 that she would have followed her exile, or have died 
 to stay behind her. she is at the court, and no 
 less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter and 
 never two ladies loved as they do. 
  
 oliverwhere will the old duke live 
  
 charlesthey say he is already in the forest of arden, and 
 a many merry men with him and there they live like 
 the old robin hood of england they say many young 
 gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time 
 carelessly, as they did in the golden world. 
  
 oliverwhat, you wrestle tomorrow before the new duke 
  
 charlesmarry, do i, sir and i came to acquaint you with a 
 matter. i am given, sir, secretly to understand 
 that your younger brother orlando hath a disposition 
 to come in disguised against me to try a fall. 
 tomorrow, sir, i wrestle for my credit and he that 
 escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him 
 well. your brother is but young and tender and, 
 for your love, i would be loath to foil him, as i 
 must, for my own honour, if he come in therefore, 
 out of my love to you, i came hither to acquaint you 
 withal, that either you might stay him from his 
 intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall 
 run into, in that it is a thing of his own search 
 and altogether against my will. 
  
 olivercharles, i thank thee for thy love to me, which 
 thou shalt find i will most kindly requite. i had 
 myself notice of my brothers purpose herein and 
 have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from 
 it, but he is resolute. ill tell thee, charles 
 it is the stubbornest young fellow of france, full 
 of ambition, an envious emulator of every mans 
 good parts, a secret and villanous contriver against 
 me his natural brother therefore use thy 
 discretion i had as lief thou didst break his neck 
 as his finger. and thou wert best look tot for if 
 thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not 
 mightily grace himself on thee, he will practise 
 against thee by poison, entrap thee by some 
 treacherous device and never leave thee till he 
 hath taen thy life by some indirect means or other 
 for, i assure thee, and almost with tears i speak 
 it, there is not one so young and so villanous this 
 day living. i speak but brotherly of him but 
 should i anatomize him to thee as he is, i must 
 blush and weep and thou must look pale and wonder. 
  
 charlesi am heartily glad i came hither to you. if he come 
 tomorrow, ill give him his payment if ever he go 
 alone again, ill never wrestle for prize more and 
 so god keep your worship 
  
 oliverfarewell, good charles. 
  
 exit charles 
  
 now will i stir this gamester i hope i shall see 
 an end of him for my soul, yet i know not why, 
 hates nothing more than he. yet hes gentle, never 
 schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of 
 all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much 
 in the heart of the world, and especially of my own 
 people, who best know him, that i am altogether 
 misprised but it shall not be so long this 
 wrestler shall clear all nothing remains but that 
 i kindle the boy thither which now ill go about. 
  
 exit 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act i 
  
  
  
 scene iilawn before the dukes palace. 
  
  
 enter celia and rosalind 
  
 celiai pray thee, rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry. 
  
 rosalinddear celia, i show more mirth than i am mistress of 
 and would you yet i were merrier unless you could 
 teach me to forget a banished father, you must not 
 learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure. 
  
 celiaherein i see thou lovest me not with the full weight 
 that i love thee. if my uncle, thy banished father, 
 had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou 
 hadst been still with me, i could have taught my 
 love to take thy father for mine so wouldst thou, 
 if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously 
 tempered as mine is to thee. 
  
 rosalindwell, i will forget the condition of my estate, to 
 rejoice in yours. 
  
 celiayou know my father hath no child but i, nor none is 
 like to have and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt 
 be his heir, for what he hath taken away from thy 
 father perforce, i will render thee again in 
 affection by mine honour, i will and when i break 
 that oath, let me turn monster therefore, my 
 sweet rose, my dear rose, be merry. 
  
 rosalindfrom henceforth i will, coz, and devise sports. let 
 me see what think you of falling in love 
  
 celiamarry, i prithee, do, to make sport withal but 
 love no man in good earnest nor no further in sport 
 neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst 
 in honour come off again. 
  
 rosalindwhat shall be our sport, then 
  
 celialet us sit and mock the good housewife fortune from 
 her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally. 
  
 rosalindi would we could do so, for her benefits are 
 mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman 
 doth most mistake in her gifts to women. 
  
 celiatis true for those that she makes fair she scarce 
 makes honest, and those that she makes honest she 
 makes very illfavouredly. 
  
 rosalindnay, now thou goest from fortunes office to 
 natures fortune reigns in gifts of the world, 
 not in the lineaments of nature. 
  
 enter touchstone 
  
 celiano when nature hath made a fair creature, may she 
 not by fortune fall into the fire though nature 
 hath given us wit to flout at fortune, hath not 
 fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument 
  
 rosalindindeed, there is fortune too hard for nature, when 
 fortune makes natures natural the cutteroff of 
 natures wit. 
  
 celiaperadventure this is not fortunes work neither, but 
 natures who perceiveth our natural wits too dull 
 to reason of such goddesses and hath sent this 
 natural for our whetstone for always the dulness of 
 the fool is the whetstone of the wits. how now, 
 wit whither wander you 
  
 touchstonemistress, you must come away to your father. 
  
 celiawere you made the messenger 
  
 touchstoneno, by mine honour, but i was bid to come for you. 
  
 rosalindwhere learned you that oath, fool 
  
 touchstoneof a certain knight that swore by his honour they 
 were good pancakes and swore by his honour the 
 mustard was naught now ill stand to it, the 
 pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and 
 yet was not the knight forsworn. 
  
 celiahow prove you that, in the great heap of your 
 knowledge 
  
 rosalinday, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom. 
  
 touchstonestand you both forth now stroke your chins, and 
 swear by your beards that i am a knave. 
  
 celiaby our beards, if we had them, thou art. 
  
 touchstoneby my knavery, if i had it, then i were but if you 
 swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn no 
 more was this knight swearing by his honour, for he 
 never had any or if he had, he had sworn it away 
 before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard. 
  
 celiaprithee, who ist that thou meanest 
  
 touchstoneone that old frederick, your father, loves. 
  
 celiamy fathers love is enough to honour him enough 
 speak no more of him youll be whipped for taxation 
 one of these days. 
  
 touchstonethe more pity, that fools may not speak wisely what 
 wise men do foolishly. 
  
 celiaby my troth, thou sayest true for since the little 
 wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery 
 that wise men have makes a great show. here comes 
 monsieur le beau. 
  
 rosalindwith his mouth full of news. 
  
 celiawhich he will put on us, as pigeons feed their young. 
  
 rosalindthen shall we be newscrammed. 
  
 celiaall the better we shall be the more marketable. 
  
 enter le beau 
  
 bon jour, monsieur le beau whats the news 
  
 le beaufair princess, you have lost much good sport. 
  
 celiasport of what colour 
  
 le beauwhat colour, madam how shall i answer you 
  
 rosalindas wit and fortune will. 
  
 touchstoneor as the destinies decree. 
  
 celiawell said that was laid on with a trowel. 
  
 touchstonenay, if i keep not my rank, 
  
 rosalindthou losest thy old smell. 
  
 le beauyou amaze me, ladies i would have told you of good 
 wrestling, which you have lost the sight of. 
  
 rosalindyou tell us the manner of the wrestling. 
  
 le beaui will tell you the beginning and, if it please 
 your ladyships, you may see the end for the best is 
 yet to do and here, where you are, they are coming 
 to perform it. 
  
 celiawell, the beginning, that is dead and buried. 
  
 le beauthere comes an old man and his three sons, 
  
 celiai could match this beginning with an old tale. 
  
 le beauthree proper young men, of excellent growth and presence. 
  
 rosalindwith bills on their necks, be it known unto all men 
 by these presents. 
  
 le beauthe eldest of the three wrestled with charles, the 
 dukes wrestler which charles in a moment threw him 
 and broke three of his ribs, that there is little 
 hope of life in him so he served the second, and 
 so the third. yonder they lie the poor old man, 
 their father, making such pitiful dole over them 
 that all the beholders take his part with weeping. 
  
 rosalindalas 
  
 touchstonebut what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies 
 have lost 
  
 le beauwhy, this that i speak of. 
  
 touchstonethus men may grow wiser every day it is the first 
 time that ever i heard breaking of ribs was sport 
 for ladies. 
  
 celiaor i, i promise thee. 
  
 rosalindbut is there any else longs to see this broken music 
 in his sides is there yet another dotes upon 
 ribbreaking shall we see this wrestling, cousin 
  
 le beauyou must, if you stay here for here is the place 
 appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to 
 perform it. 
  
 celiayonder, sure, they are coming let us now stay and see it. 
  
 flourish. enter duke frederick, lords, orlando, 
 charles, and attendants 
  
 duke frederickcome on since the youth will not be entreated, his 
 own peril on his forwardness. 
  
 rosalindis yonder the man 
  
 le beaueven he, madam. 
  
 celiaalas, he is too young yet he looks successfully. 
  
 duke frederickhow now, daughter and cousin are you crept hither 
 to see the wrestling 
  
 rosalinday, my liege, so please you give us leave. 
  
 duke frederickyou will take little delight in it, i can tell you 
 there is such odds in the man. in pity of the 
 challengers youth i would fain dissuade him, but he 
 will not be entreated. speak to him, ladies see if 
 you can move him. 
  
 celiacall him hither, good monsieur le beau. 
  
 duke frederickdo so ill not be by. 
  
 le beaumonsieur the challenger, the princesses call for you. 
  
 orlandoi attend them with all respect and duty. 
  
 rosalindyoung man, have you challenged charles the wrestler 
  
 orlandono, fair princess he is the general challenger i 
 come but in, as others do, to try with him the 
 strength of my youth. 
  
 celiayoung gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your 
 years. you have seen cruel proof of this mans 
 strength if you saw yourself with your eyes or 
 knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your 
 adventure would counsel you to a more equal 
 enterprise. we pray you, for your own sake, to 
 embrace your own safety and give over this attempt. 
  
 rosalinddo, young sir your reputation shall not therefore 
 be misprised we will make it our suit to the duke 
 that the wrestling might not go forward. 
  
 orlandoi beseech you, punish me not with your hard 
 thoughts wherein i confess me much guilty, to deny 
 so fair and excellent ladies any thing. but let 
 your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my 
 trial wherein if i be foiled, there is but one 
 shamed that was never gracious if killed, but one 
 dead that was willing to be so i shall do my 
 friends no wrong, for i have none to lament me, the 
 world no injury, for in it i have nothing only in 
 the world i fill up a place, which may be better 
 supplied when i have made it empty. 
  
 rosalindthe little strength that i have, i would it were with you. 
  
 celiaand mine, to eke out hers. 
  
 rosalindfare you well pray heaven i be deceived in you 
  
 celiayour hearts desires be with you 
  
 charlescome, where is this young gallant that is so 
 desirous to lie with his mother earth 
  
 orlandoready, sir but his will hath in it a more modest working. 
  
 duke frederickyou shall try but one fall. 
  
 charlesno, i warrant your grace, you shall not entreat him 
 to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him 
 from a first. 
  
 orlandoan you mean to mock me after, you should not have 
 mocked me before but come your ways. 
  
 rosalindnow hercules be thy speed, young man 
  
 celiai would i were invisible, to catch the strong 
 fellow by the leg. 
  
 they wrestle 
  
 rosalindo excellent young man 
  
 celiaif i had a thunderbolt in mine eye, i can tell who 
 should down. 
  
 shout. charles is thrown 
  
 duke frederickno more, no more. 
  
 orlandoyes, i beseech your grace i am not yet well breathed. 
  
 duke frederickhow dost thou, charles 
  
 le beauhe cannot speak, my lord. 
  
 duke frederickbear him away. what is thy name, young man 
  
 orlandoorlando, my liege the youngest son of sir rowland de boys. 
  
 duke fredericki would thou hadst been son to some man else 
 the world esteemd thy father honourable, 
 but i did find him still mine enemy 
 thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed, 
 hadst thou descended from another house. 
 but fare thee well thou art a gallant youth 
 i would thou hadst told me of another father. 
  
 exeunt duke frederick, train, and le beau 
  
 celiawere i my father, coz, would i do this 
  
 orlandoi am more proud to be sir rowlands son, 
 his youngest son and would not change that calling, 
 to be adopted heir to frederick. 
  
 rosalindmy father loved sir rowland as his soul, 
 and all the world was of my fathers mind 
 had i before known this young man his son, 
 i should have given him tears unto entreaties, 
 ere he should thus have ventured. 
  
 celiagentle cousin, 
 let us go thank him and encourage him 
 my fathers rough and envious disposition 
 sticks me at heart. sir, you have well deserved 
 if you do keep your promises in love 
 but justly, as you have exceeded all promise, 
 your mistress shall be happy. 
  
 rosalindgentleman, 
  
 giving him a chain from her neck 
  
 wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune, 
 that could give more, but that her hand lacks means. 
 shall we go, coz 
  
 celia                  ay. fare you well, fair gentleman. 
  
 orlandocan i not say, i thank you my better parts 
 are all thrown down, and that which here stands up 
 is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block. 
  
 rosalindhe calls us back my pride fell with my fortunes 
 ill ask him what he would. did you call, sir 
 sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown 
 more than your enemies. 
  
 celiawill you go, coz 
  
 rosalindhave with you. fare you well. 
  
 exeunt rosalind and celia 
  
 orlandowhat passion hangs these weights upon my tongue 
 i cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference. 
 o poor orlando, thou art overthrown 
 or charles or something weaker masters thee. 
  
 reenter le beau 
  
 le beaugood sir, i do in friendship counsel you 
 to leave this place. albeit you have deserved 
 high commendation, true applause and love, 
 yet such is now the dukes condition 
 that he misconstrues all that you have done. 
 the duke is humorous what he is indeed, 
 more suits you to conceive than i to speak of. 
  
 orlandoi thank you, sir and, pray you, tell me this 
 which of the two was daughter of the duke 
 that here was at the wrestling 
  
 le beauneither his daughter, if we judge by manners 
 but yet indeed the lesser is his daughter 
 the other is daughter to the banishd duke, 
 and here detaind by her usurping uncle, 
 to keep his daughter company whose loves 
 are dearer than the natural bond of sisters. 
 but i can tell you that of late this duke 
 hath taen displeasure gainst his gentle niece, 
 grounded upon no other argument 
 but that the people praise her for her virtues 
 and pity her for her good fathers sake 
 and, on my life, his malice gainst the lady 
 will suddenly break forth. sir, fare you well 
 hereafter, in a better world than this, 
 i shall desire more love and knowledge of you. 
  
 orlandoi rest much bounden to you fare you well. 
  
 exit le beau 
  
 thus must i from the smoke into the smother 
 from tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother 
 but heavenly rosalind 
  
 exit 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act i 
  
  
  
 scene iiia room in the palace. 
  
  
 enter celia and rosalind 
  
 celiawhy, cousin why, rosalind cupid have mercy not a word 
  
 rosalindnot one to throw at a dog. 
  
 celiano, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon 
 curs throw some of them at me come, lame me with reasons. 
  
 rosalindthen there were two cousins laid up when the one 
 should be lamed with reasons and the other mad 
 without any. 
  
 celiabut is all this for your father 
  
 rosalindno, some of it is for my childs father. o, how 
 full of briers is this workingday world 
  
 celiathey are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in 
 holiday foolery if we walk not in the trodden 
 paths our very petticoats will catch them. 
  
 rosalindi could shake them off my coat these burs are in my heart. 
  
 celiahem them away. 
  
 rosalindi would try, if i could cry hem and have him. 
  
 celiacome, come, wrestle with thy affections. 
  
 rosalindo, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself 
  
 celiao, a good wish upon you you will try in time, in 
 despite of a fall. but, turning these jests out of 
 service, let us talk in good earnest is it 
 possible, on such a sudden, you should fall into so 
 strong a liking with old sir rowlands youngest son 
  
 rosalindthe duke my father loved his father dearly. 
  
 celiadoth it therefore ensue that you should love his son 
 dearly by this kind of chase, i should hate him, 
 for my father hated his father dearly yet i hate 
 not orlando. 
  
 rosalindno, faith, hate him not, for my sake. 
  
 celiawhy should i not doth he not deserve well 
  
 rosalindlet me love him for that, and do you love him 
 because i do. look, here comes the duke. 
  
 celiawith his eyes full of anger. 
  
 enter duke frederick, with lords 
  
 duke frederickmistress, dispatch you with your safest haste 
 and get you from our court. 
  
 rosalindme, uncle 
  
 duke frederickyou, cousin 
 within these ten days if that thou best found 
 so near our public court as twenty miles, 
 thou diest for it. 
  
 rosalind                  i do beseech your grace, 
 let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me 
 if with myself i hold intelligence 
 or have acquaintance with mine own desires, 
 if that i do not dream or be not frantic, 
 as i do trust i am notthen, dear uncle, 
 never so much as in a thought unborn 
 did i offend your highness. 
  
 duke frederickthus do all traitors 
 if their purgation did consist in words, 
 they are as innocent as grace itself 
 let it suffice thee that i trust thee not. 
  
 rosalindyet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor 
 tell me whereon the likelihood depends. 
  
 duke frederickthou art thy fathers daughter theres enough. 
  
 rosalindso was i when your highness took his dukedom 
 so was i when your highness banishd him 
 treason is not inherited, my lord 
 or, if we did derive it from our friends, 
 whats that to me my father was no traitor 
 then, good my liege, mistake me not so much 
 to think my poverty is treacherous. 
  
 celiadear sovereign, hear me speak. 
  
 duke frederickay, celia we stayd her for your sake, 
 else had she with her father ranged along. 
  
 celiai did not then entreat to have her stay 
 it was your pleasure and your own remorse 
 i was too young that time to value her 
 but now i know her if she be a traitor, 
 why so am i we still have slept together, 
 rose at an instant, learnd, playd, eat together, 
 and wheresoever we went, like junos swans, 
 still we went coupled and inseparable. 
  
 duke frederickshe is too subtle for thee and her smoothness, 
 her very silence and her patience 
 speak to the people, and they pity her. 
 thou art a fool she robs thee of thy name 
 and thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous 
 when she is gone. then open not thy lips 
 firm and irrevocable is my doom 
 which i have passd upon her she is banishd. 
  
 celiapronounce that sentence then on me, my liege 
 i cannot live out of her company. 
  
 duke frederickyou are a fool. you, niece, provide yourself 
 if you outstay the time, upon mine honour, 
 and in the greatness of my word, you die. 
  
 exeunt duke frederick and lords 
  
 celiao my poor rosalind, whither wilt thou go 
 wilt thou change fathers i will give thee mine. 
 i charge thee, be not thou more grieved than i am. 
  
 rosalindi have more cause. 
  
 celia                  thou hast not, cousin 
 prithee be cheerful knowst thou not, the duke 
 hath banishd me, his daughter 
  
 rosalindthat he hath not. 
  
 celiano, hath not rosalind lacks then the love 
 which teacheth thee that thou and i am one 
 shall we be sunderd shall we part, sweet girl 
 no let my father seek another heir. 
 therefore devise with me how we may fly, 
 whither to go and what to bear with us 
 and do not seek to take your change upon you, 
 to bear your griefs yourself and leave me out 
 for, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale, 
 say what thou canst, ill go along with thee. 
  
 rosalindwhy, whither shall we go 
  
 celiato seek my uncle in the forest of arden. 
  
 rosalindalas, what danger will it be to us, 
 maids as we are, to travel forth so far 
 beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold. 
  
 celiaill put myself in poor and mean attire 
 and with a kind of umber smirch my face 
 the like do you so shall we pass along 
 and never stir assailants. 
  
 rosalindwere it not better, 
 because that i am more than common tall, 
 that i did suit me all points like a man 
 a gallant curtleaxe upon my thigh, 
 a boarspear in my hand andin my heart 
 lie there what hidden womans fear there will 
 well have a swashing and a martial outside, 
 as many other mannish cowards have 
 that do outface it with their semblances. 
  
 celiawhat shall i call thee when thou art a man 
  
 rosalindill have no worse a name than joves own page 
 and therefore look you call me ganymede. 
 but what will you be calld 
  
 celiasomething that hath a reference to my state 
 no longer celia, but aliena. 
  
 rosalindbut, cousin, what if we assayd to steal 
 the clownish fool out of your fathers court 
 would he not be a comfort to our travel 
  
 celiahell go along oer the wide world with me 
 leave me alone to woo him. lets away, 
 and get our jewels and our wealth together, 
 devise the fittest time and safest way 
 to hide us from pursuit that will be made 
 after my flight. now go we in content 
 to liberty and not to banishment. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act ii 
  
  
  
 scene ithe forest of arden. 
  
  
 enter duke senior, amiens, and two or three lords, 
 like foresters 
  
 duke seniornow, my comates and brothers in exile, 
 hath not old custom made this life more sweet 
 than that of painted pomp are not these woods 
 more free from peril than the envious court 
 here feel we but the penalty of adam, 
 the seasons difference, as the icy fang 
 and churlish chiding of the winters wind, 
 which, when it bites and blows upon my body, 
 even till i shrink with cold, i smile and say 
 this is no flattery these are counsellors 
 that feelingly persuade me what i am. 
 sweet are the uses of adversity, 
 which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, 
 wears yet a precious jewel in his head 
 and this our life exempt from public haunt 
 finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, 
 sermons in stones and good in every thing. 
 i would not change it. 
  
 amienshappy is your grace, 
 that can translate the stubbornness of fortune 
 into so quiet and so sweet a style. 
  
 duke seniorcome, shall we go and kill us venison 
 and yet it irks me the poor dappled fools, 
 being native burghers of this desert city, 
 should in their own confines with forked heads 
 have their round haunches gored. 
  
 first lordindeed, my lord, 
 the melancholy jaques grieves at that, 
 and, in that kind, swears you do more usurp 
 than doth your brother that hath banishd you. 
 today my lord of amiens and myself 
 did steal behind him as he lay along 
 under an oak whose antique root peeps out 
 upon the brook that brawls along this wood 
 to the which place a poor sequesterd stag, 
 that from the hunters aim had taen a hurt, 
 did come to languish, and indeed, my lord, 
 the wretched animal heaved forth such groans 
 that their discharge did stretch his leathern coat 
 almost to bursting, and the big round tears 
 coursed one another down his innocent nose 
 in piteous chase and thus the hairy fool 
 much marked of the melancholy jaques, 
 stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook, 
 augmenting it with tears. 
  
 duke seniorbut what said jaques 
 did he not moralize this spectacle 
  
 first lordo, yes, into a thousand similes. 
 first, for his weeping into the needless stream 
 poor deer, quoth he, thou makest a testament 
 as worldlings do, giving thy sum of more 
 to that which had too much then, being there alone, 
 left and abandond of his velvet friends, 
 tis right quoth he thus misery doth part 
 the flux of company anon a careless herd, 
 full of the pasture, jumps along by him 
 and never stays to greet him ay quoth jaques, 
 sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens 
 tis just the fashion wherefore do you look 
 upon that poor and broken bankrupt there 
 thus most invectively he pierceth through 
 the body of the country, city, court, 
 yea, and of this our life, swearing that we 
 are mere usurpers, tyrants and whats worse, 
 to fright the animals and to kill them up 
 in their assignd and native dwellingplace. 
  
 duke seniorand did you leave him in this contemplation 
  
 second lordwe did, my lord, weeping and commenting 
 upon the sobbing deer. 
  
 duke seniorshow me the place 
 i love to cope him in these sullen fits, 
 for then hes full of matter. 
  
 first lordill bring you to him straight. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act ii 
  
  
  
 scene iia room in the palace. 
  
  
 enter duke frederick, with lords 
  
 duke frederickcan it be possible that no man saw them 
 it cannot be some villains of my court 
 are of consent and sufferance in this. 
  
 first lordi cannot hear of any that did see her. 
 the ladies, her attendants of her chamber, 
 saw her abed, and in the morning early 
 they found the bed untreasured of their mistress. 
  
 second lordmy lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft 
 your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing. 
 hisperia, the princess gentlewoman, 
 confesses that she secretly oerheard 
 your daughter and her cousin much commend 
 the parts and graces of the wrestler 
 that did but lately foil the sinewy charles 
 and she believes, wherever they are gone, 
 that youth is surely in their company. 
  
 duke fredericksend to his brother fetch that gallant hither 
 if he be absent, bring his brother to me 
 ill make him find him do this suddenly, 
 and let not search and inquisition quail 
 to bring again these foolish runaways. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act ii 
  
  
  
 scene iiibefore olivers house. 
  
  
 enter orlando and adam, meeting 
  
 orlandowhos there 
  
 adamwhat, my young master o, my gentle master 
 o my sweet master o you memory 
 of old sir rowland why, what make you here 
 why are you virtuous why do people love you 
 and wherefore are you gentle, strong and valiant 
 why would you be so fond to overcome 
 the bonny priser of the humorous duke 
 your praise is come too swiftly home before you. 
 know you not, master, to some kind of men 
 their graces serve them but as enemies 
 no more do yours your virtues, gentle master, 
 are sanctified and holy traitors to you. 
 o, what a world is this, when what is comely 
 envenoms him that bears it 
  
 orlandowhy, whats the matter 
  
 adamo unhappy youth 
 come not within these doors within this roof 
 the enemy of all your graces lives 
 your brotherno, no brother yet the son 
 yet not the son, i will not call him son 
 of him i was about to call his father 
 hath heard your praises, and this night he means 
 to burn the lodging where you use to lie 
 and you within it if he fail of that, 
 he will have other means to cut you off. 
 i overheard him and his practises. 
 this is no place this house is but a butchery 
 abhor it, fear it, do not enter it. 
  
 orlandowhy, whither, adam, wouldst thou have me go 
  
 adamno matter whither, so you come not here. 
  
 orlandowhat, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food 
 or with a base and boisterous sword enforce 
 a thievish living on the common road 
 this i must do, or know not what to do 
 yet this i will not do, do how i can 
 i rather will subject me to the malice 
 of a diverted blood and bloody brother. 
  
 adambut do not so. i have five hundred crowns, 
 the thrifty hire i saved under your father, 
 which i did store to be my fosternurse 
 when service should in my old limbs lie lame 
 and unregarded age in corners thrown 
 take that, and he that doth the ravens feed, 
 yea, providently caters for the sparrow, 
 be comfort to my age here is the gold 
 and all this i give you. let me be your servant 
 though i look old, yet i am strong and lusty 
 for in my youth i never did apply 
 hot and rebellious liquors in my blood, 
 nor did not with unbashful forehead woo 
 the means of weakness and debility 
 therefore my age is as a lusty winter, 
 frosty, but kindly let me go with you 
 ill do the service of a younger man 
 in all your business and necessities. 
  
 orlandoo good old man, how well in thee appears 
 the constant service of the antique world, 
 when service sweat for duty, not for meed 
 thou art not for the fashion of these times, 
 where none will sweat but for promotion, 
 and having that, do choke their service up 
 even with the having it is not so with thee. 
 but, poor old man, thou prunest a rotten tree, 
 that cannot so much as a blossom yield 
 in lieu of all thy pains and husbandry 
 but come thy ways well go along together, 
 and ere we have thy youthful wages spent, 
 well light upon some settled low content. 
  
 adammaster, go on, and i will follow thee, 
 to the last gasp, with truth and loyalty. 
 from seventeen years till now almost fourscore 
 here lived i, but now live here no more. 
 at seventeen years many their fortunes seek 
 but at fourscore it is too late a week 
 yet fortune cannot recompense me better 
 than to die well and not my masters debtor. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act ii 
  
  
  
 scene ivthe forest of arden. 
  
  
 enter rosalind for ganymede, celia for aliena, 
 and touchstone 
  
 rosalindo jupiter, how weary are my spirits 
  
 touchstonei care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary. 
  
 rosalindi could find in my heart to disgrace my mans 
 apparel and to cry like a woman but i must comfort 
 the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show 
 itself courageous to petticoat therefore courage, 
 good aliena 
  
 celiai pray you, bear with me i cannot go no further. 
  
 touchstonefor my part, i had rather bear with you than bear 
 you yet i should bear no cross if i did bear you, 
 for i think you have no money in your purse. 
  
 rosalindwell, this is the forest of arden. 
  
 touchstoneay, now am i in arden the more fool i when i was 
 at home, i was in a better place but travellers 
 must be content. 
  
 rosalinday, be so, good touchstone. 
  
 enter corin and silvius 
  
 look you, who comes here a young man and an old in 
 solemn talk. 
  
 corinthat is the way to make her scorn you still. 
  
 silviuso corin, that thou knewst how i do love her 
  
 corini partly guess for i have loved ere now. 
  
 silviusno, corin, being old, thou canst not guess, 
 though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover 
 as ever sighd upon a midnight pillow 
 but if thy love were ever like to mine 
 as sure i think did never man love so 
 how many actions most ridiculous 
 hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy 
  
 corininto a thousand that i have forgotten. 
  
 silviuso, thou didst then neer love so heartily 
 if thou rememberst not the slightest folly 
 that ever love did make thee run into, 
 thou hast not loved 
 or if thou hast not sat as i do now, 
 wearying thy hearer in thy mistress praise, 
 thou hast not loved 
 or if thou hast not broke from company 
 abruptly, as my passion now makes me, 
 thou hast not loved. 
 o phebe, phebe, phebe 
  
 exit 
  
 rosalindalas, poor shepherd searching of thy wound, 
 i have by hard adventure found mine own. 
  
 touchstoneand i mine. i remember, when i was in love i broke 
 my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for 
 coming anight to jane smile and i remember the 
 kissing of her batlet and the cows dugs that her 
 pretty chopt hands had milked and i remember the 
 wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom i took 
 two cods and, giving her them again, said with 
 weeping tears wear these for my sake. we that are 
 true lovers run into strange capers but as all is 
 mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly. 
  
 rosalindthou speakest wiser than thou art ware of. 
  
 touchstonenay, i shall neer be ware of mine own wit till i 
 break my shins against it. 
  
 rosalindjove, jove this shepherds passion 
 is much upon my fashion. 
  
 touchstoneand mine but it grows something stale with me. 
  
 celiai pray you, one of you question yond man 
 if he for gold will give us any food 
 i faint almost to death. 
  
 touchstoneholla, you clown 
  
 rosalindpeace, fool hes not thy kinsman. 
  
 corinwho calls 
  
 touchstoneyour betters, sir. 
  
 corin                  else are they very wretched. 
  
 rosalindpeace, i say. good even to you, friend. 
  
 corinand to you, gentle sir, and to you all. 
  
 rosalindi prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold 
 can in this desert place buy entertainment, 
 bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed 
 heres a young maid with travel much oppressd 
 and faints for succor. 
  
 corinfair sir, i pity her 
 and wish, for her sake more than for mine own, 
 my fortunes were more able to relieve her 
 but i am shepherd to another man 
 and do not shear the fleeces that i graze 
 my master is of churlish disposition 
 and little recks to find the way to heaven 
 by doing deeds of hospitality 
 besides, his cote, his flocks and bounds of feed 
 are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now, 
 by reason of his absence, there is nothing 
 that you will feed on but what is, come see. 
 and in my voice most welcome shall you be. 
  
 rosalindwhat is he that shall buy his flock and pasture 
  
 corinthat young swain that you saw here but erewhile, 
 that little cares for buying any thing. 
  
 rosalindi pray thee, if it stand with honesty, 
 buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock, 
 and thou shalt have to pay for it of us. 
  
 celiaand we will mend thy wages. i like this place. 
 and willingly could waste my time in it. 
  
 corinassuredly the thing is to be sold 
 go with me if you like upon report 
 the soil, the profit and this kind of life, 
 i will your very faithful feeder be 
 and buy it with your gold right suddenly. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act ii 
  
  
  
 scene vthe forest. 
  
  
 enter amiens, jaques, and others 
  
 song. 
 amiensunder the greenwood tree 
 who loves to lie with me, 
 and turn his merry note 
 unto the sweet birds throat, 
 come hither, come hither, come hither 
 here shall he see no enemy 
 but winter and rough weather. 
  
 jaquesmore, more, i prithee, more. 
  
 amiensit will make you melancholy, monsieur jaques. 
  
 jaquesi thank it. more, i prithee, more. i can suck 
 melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs. 
 more, i prithee, more. 
  
 amiensmy voice is ragged i know i cannot please you. 
  
 jaquesi do not desire you to please me i do desire you to 
 sing. come, more another stanzo call you em stanzos 
  
 amienswhat you will, monsieur jaques. 
  
 jaquesnay, i care not for their names they owe me 
 nothing. will you sing 
  
 amiensmore at your request than to please myself. 
  
 jaqueswell then, if ever i thank any man, ill thank you 
 but that they call compliment is like the encounter 
 of two dogapes, and when a man thanks me heartily, 
 methinks i have given him a penny and he renders me 
 the beggarly thanks. come, sing and you that will 
 not, hold your tongues. 
  
 amienswell, ill end the song. sirs, cover the while the 
 duke will drink under this tree. he hath been all 
 this day to look you. 
  
 jaquesand i have been all this day to avoid him. he is 
 too disputable for my company i think of as many 
 matters as he, but i give heaven thanks and make no 
 boast of them. come, warble, come. 
  
 song. 
 who doth ambition shun 
  
 all together here 
  
 and loves to live i the sun, 
 seeking the food he eats 
 and pleased with what he gets, 
 come hither, come hither, come hither 
 here shall he see no enemy 
 but winter and rough weather. 
  
 jaquesill give you a verse to this note that i made 
 yesterday in despite of my invention. 
  
 amiensand ill sing it. 
  
 jaquesthus it goes 
  
 if it do come to pass 
 that any man turn ass, 
 leaving his wealth and ease, 
 a stubborn will to please, 
 ducdame, ducdame, ducdame 
 here shall he see 
 gross fools as he, 
 an if he will come to me. 
  
 amienswhats that ducdame 
  
 jaquestis a greek invocation, to call fools into a 
 circle. ill go sleep, if i can if i cannot, ill 
 rail against all the firstborn of egypt. 
  
 amiensand ill go seek the duke his banquet is prepared. 
  
 exeunt severally 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act ii 
  
  
  
 scene vithe forest. 
  
  
 enter orlando and adam 
  
 adamdear master, i can go no further. o, i die for food 
 here lie i down, and measure out my grave. farewell, 
 kind master. 
  
 orlandowhy, how now, adam no greater heart in thee live 
 a little comfort a little cheer thyself a little. 
 if this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, i 
 will either be food for it or bring it for food to 
 thee. thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. 
 for my sake be comfortable hold death awhile at 
 the arms end i will here be with thee presently 
 and if i bring thee not something to eat, i will 
 give thee leave to die but if thou diest before i 
 come, thou art a mocker of my labour. well said 
 thou lookest cheerly, and ill be with thee quickly. 
 yet thou liest in the bleak air come, i will bear 
 thee to some shelter and thou shalt not die for 
 lack of a dinner, if there live any thing in this 
 desert. cheerly, good adam 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act ii 
  
  
  
 scene viithe forest. 
  
  
 a table set out. enter duke senior, amiens, and 
 lords like outlaws 
  
 duke seniori think he be transformd into a beast 
 for i can no where find him like a man. 
  
 first lordmy lord, he is but even now gone hence 
 here was he merry, hearing of a song. 
  
 duke seniorif he, compact of jars, grow musical, 
 we shall have shortly discord in the spheres. 
 go, seek him tell him i would speak with him. 
  
 enter jaques 
  
 first lordhe saves my labour by his own approach. 
  
 duke seniorwhy, how now, monsieur what a life is this, 
 that your poor friends must woo your company 
 what, you look merrily 
  
 jaquesa fool, a fool i met a fool i the forest, 
 a motley fool a miserable world 
 as i do live by food, i met a fool 
 who laid him down and baskd him in the sun, 
 and raild on lady fortune in good terms, 
 in good set terms and yet a motley fool. 
 good morrow, fool, quoth i. no, sir, quoth he, 
 call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune 
 and then he drew a dial from his poke, 
 and, looking on it with lacklustre eye, 
 says very wisely, it is ten oclock 
 thus we may see, quoth he, how the world wags 
 tis but an hour ago since it was nine, 
 and after one hour more twill be eleven 
 and so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe, 
 and then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot 
 and thereby hangs a tale. when i did hear 
 the motley fool thus moral on the time, 
 my lungs began to crow like chanticleer, 
 that fools should be so deepcontemplative, 
 and i did laugh sans intermission 
 an hour by his dial. o noble fool 
 a worthy fool motleys the only wear. 
  
 duke seniorwhat fool is this 
  
 jaqueso worthy fool one that hath been a courtier, 
 and says, if ladies be but young and fair, 
 they have the gift to know it and in his brain, 
 which is as dry as the remainder biscuit 
 after a voyage, he hath strange places crammd 
 with observation, the which he vents 
 in mangled forms. o that i were a fool 
 i am ambitious for a motley coat. 
  
 duke seniorthou shalt have one. 
  
 jaquesit is my only suit 
 provided that you weed your better judgments 
 of all opinion that grows rank in them 
 that i am wise. i must have liberty 
 withal, as large a charter as the wind, 
 to blow on whom i please for so fools have 
 and they that are most galled with my folly, 
 they most must laugh. and why, sir, must they so 
 the why is plain as way to parish church 
 he that a fool doth very wisely hit 
 doth very foolishly, although he smart, 
 not to seem senseless of the bob if not, 
 the wise mans folly is anatomized 
 even by the squandering glances of the fool. 
 invest me in my motley give me leave 
 to speak my mind, and i will through and through 
 cleanse the foul body of the infected world, 
 if they will patiently receive my medicine. 
  
 duke seniorfie on thee i can tell what thou wouldst do. 
  
 jaqueswhat, for a counter, would i do but good 
  
 duke seniormost mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin 
 for thou thyself hast been a libertine, 
 as sensual as the brutish sting itself 
 and all the embossed sores and headed evils, 
 that thou with licence of free foot hast caught, 
 wouldst thou disgorge into the general world. 
  
 jaqueswhy, who cries out on pride, 
 that can therein tax any private party 
 doth it not flow as hugely as the sea, 
 till that the weary very means do ebb 
 what woman in the city do i name, 
 when that i say the citywoman bears 
 the cost of princes on unworthy shoulders 
 who can come in and say that i mean her, 
 when such a one as she such is her neighbour 
 or what is he of basest function 
 that says his bravery is not of my cost, 
 thinking that i mean him, but therein suits 
 his folly to the mettle of my speech 
 there then how then what then let me see wherein 
 my tongue hath wrongd him if it do him right, 
 then he hath wrongd himself if he be free, 
 why then my taxing like a wildgoose flies, 
 unclaimd of any man. but who comes here 
  
 enter orlando, with his sword drawn 
  
 orlandoforbear, and eat no more. 
  
 jaqueswhy, i have eat none yet. 
  
 orlandonor shalt not, till necessity be served. 
  
 jaquesof what kind should this cock come of 
  
 duke seniorart thou thus boldend, man, by thy distress, 
 or else a rude despiser of good manners, 
 that in civility thou seemst so empty 
  
 orlandoyou touchd my vein at first the thorny point 
 of bare distress hath taen from me the show 
 of smooth civility yet am i inland bred 
 and know some nurture. but forbear, i say 
 he dies that touches any of this fruit 
 till i and my affairs are answered. 
  
 jaquesan you will not be answered with reason, i must die. 
  
 duke seniorwhat would you have your gentleness shall force 
 more than your force move us to gentleness. 
  
 orlandoi almost die for food and let me have it. 
  
 duke seniorsit down and feed, and welcome to our table. 
  
 orlandospeak you so gently pardon me, i pray you 
 i thought that all things had been savage here 
 and therefore put i on the countenance 
 of stern commandment. but whateer you are 
 that in this desert inaccessible, 
 under the shade of melancholy boughs, 
 lose and neglect the creeping hours of time 
 if ever you have lookd on better days, 
 if ever been where bells have knolld to church, 
 if ever sat at any good mans feast, 
 if ever from your eyelids wiped a tear 
 and know what tis to pity and be pitied, 
 let gentleness my strong enforcement be 
 in the which hope i blush, and hide my sword. 
  
 duke seniortrue is it that we have seen better days, 
 and have with holy bell been knolld to church 
 and sat at good mens feasts and wiped our eyes 
 of drops that sacred pity hath engenderd 
 and therefore sit you down in gentleness 
 and take upon command what help we have 
 that to your wanting may be ministerd. 
  
 orlandothen but forbear your food a little while, 
 whiles, like a doe, i go to find my fawn 
 and give it food. there is an old poor man, 
 who after me hath many a weary step 
 limpd in pure love till he be first sufficed, 
 oppressd with two weak evils, age and hunger, 
 i will not touch a bit. 
  
 duke seniorgo find him out, 
 and we will nothing waste till you return. 
  
 orlandoi thank ye and be blest for your good comfort 
  
 exit 
  
 duke seniorthou seest we are not all alone unhappy 
 this wide and universal theatre 
 presents more woeful pageants than the scene 
 wherein we play in. 
  
 jaquesall the worlds a stage, 
 and all the men and women merely players 
 they have their exits and their entrances 
 and one man in his time plays many parts, 
 his acts being seven ages. at first the infant, 
 mewling and puking in the nurses arms. 
 and then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel 
 and shining morning face, creeping like snail 
 unwillingly to school. and then the lover, 
 sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad 
 made to his mistress eyebrow. then a soldier, 
 full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard, 
 jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel, 
 seeking the bubble reputation 
 even in the cannons mouth. and then the justice, 
 in fair round belly with good capon lined, 
 with eyes severe and beard of formal cut, 
 full of wise saws and modern instances 
 and so he plays his part. the sixth age shifts 
 into the lean and slipperd pantaloon, 
 with spectacles on nose and pouch on side, 
 his youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide 
 for his shrunk shank and his big manly voice, 
 turning again toward childish treble, pipes 
 and whistles in his sound. last scene of all, 
 that ends this strange eventful history, 
 is second childishness and mere oblivion, 
 sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything. 
  
 reenter orlando, with adam 
  
 duke seniorwelcome. set down your venerable burthen, 
 and let him feed. 
  
 orlandoi thank you most for him. 
  
 adamso had you need 
 i scarce can speak to thank you for myself. 
  
 duke seniorwelcome fall to i will not trouble you 
 as yet, to question you about your fortunes. 
 give us some music and, good cousin, sing. 
  
 song. 
 amiensblow, blow, thou winter wind. 
 thou art not so unkind 
 as mans ingratitude 
 thy tooth is not so keen, 
 because thou art not seen, 
 although thy breath be rude. 
 heighho sing, heighho unto the green holly 
 most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly 
 then, heighho, the holly 
 this life is most jolly. 
 freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky, 
 that dost not bite so nigh 
 as benefits forgot 
 though thou the waters warp, 
 thy sting is not so sharp 
 as friend rememberd not. 
 heighho sing, c. 
  
 duke seniorif that you were the good sir rowlands son, 
 as you have whisperd faithfully you were, 
 and as mine eye doth his effigies witness 
 most truly limnd and living in your face, 
 be truly welcome hither i am the duke 
 that loved your father the residue of your fortune, 
 go to my cave and tell me. good old man, 
 thou art right welcome as thy master is. 
 support him by the arm. give me your hand, 
 and let me all your fortunes understand. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iii 
  
  
  
 scene ia room in the palace. 
  
  
 enter duke frederick, lords, and oliver 
  
 duke fredericknot see him since sir, sir, that cannot be 
 but were i not the better part made mercy, 
 i should not seek an absent argument 
 of my revenge, thou present. but look to it 
 find out thy brother, wheresoeer he is 
 seek him with candle bring him dead or living 
 within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more 
 to seek a living in our territory. 
 thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine 
 worth seizure do we seize into our hands, 
 till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth 
 of what we think against thee. 
  
 olivero that your highness knew my heart in this 
 i never loved my brother in my life. 
  
 duke frederickmore villain thou. well, push him out of doors 
 and let my officers of such a nature 
 make an extent upon his house and lands 
 do this expediently and turn him going. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iii 
  
  
  
 scene iithe forest. 
  
  
 enter orlando, with a paper 
  
 orlandohang there, my verse, in witness of my love 
 and thou, thricecrowned queen of night, survey 
 with thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above, 
 thy huntress name that my full life doth sway. 
 o rosalind these trees shall be my books 
 and in their barks my thoughts ill character 
 that every eye which in this forest looks 
 shall see thy virtue witnessd every where. 
 run, run, orlando carve on every tree 
 the fair, the chaste and unexpressive she. 
  
 exit 
  
 enter corin and touchstone 
  
 corinand how like you this shepherds life, master touchstone 
  
 touchstonetruly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good 
 life, but in respect that it is a shepherds life, 
 it is naught. in respect that it is solitary, i 
 like it very well but in respect that it is 
 private, it is a very vile life. now, in respect it 
 is in the fields, it pleaseth me well but in 
 respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. as 
 is it a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well 
 but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much 
 against my stomach. hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd 
  
 corinno more but that i know the more one sickens the 
 worse at ease he is and that he that wants money, 
 means and content is without three good friends 
 that the property of rain is to wet and fire to 
 burn that good pasture makes fat sheep, and that a 
 great cause of the night is lack of the sun that 
 he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may 
 complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred. 
  
 touchstonesuch a one is a natural philosopher. wast ever in 
 court, shepherd 
  
 corinno, truly. 
  
 touchstonethen thou art damned. 
  
 corinnay, i hope. 
  
 touchstonetruly, thou art damned like an illroasted egg, all 
 on one side. 
  
 corinfor not being at court your reason. 
  
 touchstonewhy, if thou never wast at court, thou never sawest 
 good manners if thou never sawest good manners, 
 then thy manners must be wicked and wickedness is 
 sin, and sin is damnation. thou art in a parlous 
 state, shepherd. 
  
 corinnot a whit, touchstone those that are good manners 
 at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the 
 behavior of the country is most mockable at the 
 court. you told me you salute not at the court, but 
 you kiss your hands that courtesy would be 
 uncleanly, if courtiers were shepherds. 
  
 touchstoneinstance, briefly come, instance. 
  
 corinwhy, we are still handling our ewes, and their 
 fells, you know, are greasy. 
  
 touchstonewhy, do not your courtiers hands sweat and is not 
 the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of 
 a man shallow, shallow. a better instance, i say come. 
  
 corinbesides, our hands are hard. 
  
 touchstoneyour lips will feel them the sooner. shallow again. 
 a more sounder instance, come. 
  
 corinand they are often tarred over with the surgery of 
 our sheep and would you have us kiss tar the 
 courtiers hands are perfumed with civet. 
  
 touchstonemost shallow man thou wormsmeat, in respect of a 
 good piece of flesh indeed learn of the wise, and 
 perpend civet is of a baser birth than tar, the 
 very uncleanly flux of a cat. mend the instance, shepherd. 
  
 corinyou have too courtly a wit for me ill rest. 
  
 touchstonewilt thou rest damned god help thee, shallow man 
 god make incision in thee thou art raw. 
  
 corinsir, i am a true labourer i earn that i eat, get 
 that i wear, owe no man hate, envy no mans 
 happiness, glad of other mens good, content with my 
 harm, and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes 
 graze and my lambs suck. 
  
 touchstonethat is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes 
 and the rams together and to offer to get your 
 living by the copulation of cattle to be bawd to a 
 bellwether, and to betray a shelamb of a 
 twelvemonth to a crookedpated, old, cuckoldly ram, 
 out of all reasonable match. if thou beest not 
 damned for this, the devil himself will have no 
 shepherds i cannot see else how thou shouldst 
 scape. 
  
 corinhere comes young master ganymede, my new mistresss brother. 
  
 enter rosalind, with a paper, reading 
  
 rosalind     from the east to western ind, 
 no jewel is like rosalind. 
 her worth, being mounted on the wind, 
 through all the world bears rosalind. 
 all the pictures fairest lined 
 are but black to rosalind. 
 let no fair be kept in mind 
 but the fair of rosalind. 
  
 touchstoneill rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and 
 suppers and sleepinghours excepted it is the 
 right butterwomens rank to market. 
  
 rosalindout, fool 
  
 touchstonefor a taste 
 if a hart do lack a hind, 
 let him seek out rosalind. 
 if the cat will after kind, 
 so be sure will rosalind. 
 winter garments must be lined, 
 so must slender rosalind. 
 they that reap must sheaf and bind 
 then to cart with rosalind. 
 sweetest nut hath sourest rind, 
 such a nut is rosalind. 
 he that sweetest rose will find 
 must find loves prick and rosalind. 
 this is the very false gallop of verses why do you 
 infect yourself with them 
  
 rosalindpeace, you dull fool i found them on a tree. 
  
 touchstonetruly, the tree yields bad fruit. 
  
 rosalindill graff it with you, and then i shall graff it 
 with a medlar then it will be the earliest fruit 
 i the country for youll be rotten ere you be half 
 ripe, and thats the right virtue of the medlar. 
  
 touchstoneyou have said but whether wisely or no, let the 
 forest judge. 
  
 enter celia, with a writing 
  
 rosalindpeace here comes my sister, reading stand aside. 
  
 celiareads 
  
 why should this a desert be 
 for it is unpeopled no 
 tongues ill hang on every tree, 
 that shall civil sayings show 
 some, how brief the life of man 
 runs his erring pilgrimage, 
 that the stretching of a span 
 buckles in his sum of age 
 some, of violated vows 
 twixt the souls of friend and friend 
 but upon the fairest boughs, 
 or at every sentence end, 
 will i rosalinda write, 
 teaching all that read to know 
 the quintessence of every sprite 
 heaven would in little show. 
 therefore heaven nature charged 
 that one body should be filld 
 with all graces wideenlarged 
 nature presently distilld 
 helens cheek, but not her heart, 
 cleopatras majesty, 
 atalantas better part, 
 sad lucretias modesty. 
 thus rosalind of many parts 
 by heavenly synod was devised, 
 of many faces, eyes and hearts, 
 to have the touches dearest prized. 
 heaven would that she these gifts should have, 
 and i to live and die her slave. 
  
 rosalindo most gentle pulpiter what tedious homily of love 
 have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never 
 cried have patience, good people 
  
 celiahow now back, friends shepherd, go off a little. 
 go with him, sirrah. 
  
 touchstonecome, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat 
 though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage. 
  
 exeunt corin and touchstone 
  
 celiadidst thou hear these verses 
  
 rosalindo, yes, i heard them all, and more too for some of 
 them had in them more feet than the verses would bear. 
  
 celiathats no matter the feet might bear the verses. 
  
 rosalinday, but the feet were lame and could not bear 
 themselves without the verse and therefore stood 
 lamely in the verse. 
  
 celiabut didst thou hear without wondering how thy name 
 should be hanged and carved upon these trees 
  
 rosalindi was seven of the nine days out of the wonder 
 before you came for look here what i found on a 
 palmtree. i was never so berhymed since 
 pythagoras time, that i was an irish rat, which i 
 can hardly remember. 
  
 celiatrow you who hath done this 
  
 rosalindis it a man 
  
 celiaand a chain, that you once wore, about his neck. 
 change you colour 
  
 rosalindi prithee, who 
  
 celiao lord, lord it is a hard matter for friends to 
 meet but mountains may be removed with earthquakes 
 and so encounter. 
  
 rosalindnay, but who is it 
  
 celiais it possible 
  
 rosalindnay, i prithee now with most petitionary vehemence, 
 tell me who it is. 
  
 celiao wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful 
 wonderful and yet again wonderful, and after that, 
 out of all hooping 
  
 rosalindgood my complexion dost thou think, though i am 
 caparisoned like a man, i have a doublet and hose in 
 my disposition one inch of delay more is a 
 southsea of discovery i prithee, tell me who is it 
 quickly, and speak apace. i would thou couldst 
 stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man 
 out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow 
 mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at 
 all. i prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that 
 may drink thy tidings. 
  
 celiaso you may put a man in your belly. 
  
 rosalindis he of gods making what manner of man is his 
 head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard 
  
 celianay, he hath but a little beard. 
  
 rosalindwhy, god will send more, if the man will be 
 thankful let me stay the growth of his beard, if 
 thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin. 
  
 celiait is young orlando, that tripped up the wrestlers 
 heels and your heart both in an instant. 
  
 rosalindnay, but the devil take mocking speak, sad brow and 
 true maid. 
  
 celiai faith, coz, tis he. 
  
 rosalindorlando 
  
 celiaorlando. 
  
 rosalindalas the day what shall i do with my doublet and 
 hose what did he when thou sawest him what said 
 he how looked he wherein went he what makes 
 him here did he ask for me where remains he 
 how parted he with thee and when shalt thou see 
 him again answer me in one word. 
  
 celiayou must borrow me gargantuas mouth first tis a 
 word too great for any mouth of this ages size. to 
 say ay and no to these particulars is more than to 
 answer in a catechism. 
  
 rosalindbut doth he know that i am in this forest and in 
 mans apparel looks he as freshly as he did the 
 day he wrestled 
  
 celiait is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the 
 propositions of a lover but take a taste of my 
 finding him, and relish it with good observance. 
 i found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn. 
  
 rosalindit may well be called joves tree, when it drops 
 forth such fruit. 
  
 celiagive me audience, good madam. 
  
 rosalindproceed. 
  
 celiathere lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight. 
  
 rosalindthough it be pity to see such a sight, it well 
 becomes the ground. 
  
 celiacry holla to thy tongue, i prithee it curvets 
 unseasonably. he was furnished like a hunter. 
  
 rosalindo, ominous he comes to kill my heart. 
  
 celiai would sing my song without a burden thou bringest 
 me out of tune. 
  
 rosalinddo you not know i am a woman when i think, i must 
 speak. sweet, say on. 
  
 celiayou bring me out. soft comes he not here 
  
 enter orlando and jaques 
  
 rosalindtis he slink by, and note him. 
  
 jaquesi thank you for your company but, good faith, i had 
 as lief have been myself alone. 
  
 orlandoand so had i but yet, for fashion sake, i thank you 
 too for your society. 
  
 jaquesgod be wi you lets meet as little as we can. 
  
 orlandoi do desire we may be better strangers. 
  
 jaquesi pray you, mar no more trees with writing 
 lovesongs in their barks. 
  
 orlandoi pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading 
 them illfavouredly. 
  
 jaquesrosalind is your loves name 
  
 orlandoyes, just. 
  
 jaquesi do not like her name. 
  
 orlandothere was no thought of pleasing you when she was 
 christened. 
  
 jaqueswhat stature is she of 
  
 orlandojust as high as my heart. 
  
 jaquesyou are full of pretty answers. have you not been 
 acquainted with goldsmiths wives, and conned them 
 out of rings 
  
 orlandonot so but i answer you right painted cloth, from 
 whence you have studied your questions. 
  
 jaquesyou have a nimble wit i think twas made of 
 atalantas heels. will you sit down with me and 
 we two will rail against our mistress the world and 
 all our misery. 
  
 orlandoi will chide no breather in the world but myself, 
 against whom i know most faults. 
  
 jaquesthe worst fault you have is to be in love. 
  
 orlandotis a fault i will not change for your best virtue. 
 i am weary of you. 
  
 jaquesby my troth, i was seeking for a fool when i found 
 you. 
  
 orlandohe is drowned in the brook look but in, and you 
 shall see him. 
  
 jaquesthere i shall see mine own figure. 
  
 orlandowhich i take to be either a fool or a cipher. 
  
 jaquesill tarry no longer with you farewell, good 
 signior love. 
  
 orlandoi am glad of your departure adieu, good monsieur 
 melancholy. 
  
 exit jaques 
  
 rosalindaside to celia  i will speak to him, like a saucy 
 lackey and under that habit play the knave with him. 
 do you hear, forester 
  
 orlandovery well what would you 
  
 rosalindi pray you, what ist oclock 
  
 orlandoyou should ask me what time o day theres no clock 
 in the forest. 
  
 rosalindthen there is no true lover in the forest else 
 sighing every minute and groaning every hour would 
 detect the lazy foot of time as well as a clock. 
  
 orlandoand why not the swift foot of time had not that 
 been as proper 
  
 rosalindby no means, sir time travels in divers paces with 
 divers persons. ill tell you who time ambles 
 withal, who time trots withal, who time gallops 
 withal and who he stands still withal. 
  
 orlandoi prithee, who doth he trot withal 
  
 rosalindmarry, he trots hard with a young maid between the 
 contract of her marriage and the day it is 
 solemnized if the interim be but a sennight, 
 times pace is so hard that it seems the length of 
 seven year. 
  
 orlandowho ambles time withal 
  
 rosalindwith a priest that lacks latin and a rich man that 
 hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because 
 he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because 
 he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean 
 and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden 
 of heavy tedious penury these time ambles withal. 
  
 orlandowho doth he gallop withal 
  
 rosalindwith a thief to the gallows, for though he go as 
 softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there. 
  
 orlandowho stays it still withal 
  
 rosalindwith lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between 
 term and term and then they perceive not how time moves. 
  
 orlandowhere dwell you, pretty youth 
  
 rosalindwith this shepherdess, my sister here in the 
 skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat. 
  
 orlandoare you native of this place 
  
 rosalindas the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled. 
  
 orlandoyour accent is something finer than you could 
 purchase in so removed a dwelling. 
  
 rosalindi have been told so of many but indeed an old 
 religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was 
 in his youth an inland man one that knew courtship 
 too well, for there he fell in love. i have heard 
 him read many lectures against it, and i thank god 
 i am not a woman, to be touched with so many 
 giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their 
 whole sex withal. 
  
 orlandocan you remember any of the principal evils that he 
 laid to the charge of women 
  
 rosalindthere were none principal they were all like one 
 another as halfpence are, every one fault seeming 
 monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it. 
  
 orlandoi prithee, recount some of them. 
  
 rosalindno, i will not cast away my physic but on those that 
 are sick. there is a man haunts the forest, that 
 abuses our young plants with carving rosalind on 
 their barks hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies 
 on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of 
 rosalind if i could meet that fancymonger i would 
 give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the 
 quotidian of love upon him. 
  
 orlandoi am he that is so loveshaked i pray you tell me 
 your remedy. 
  
 rosalindthere is none of my uncles marks upon you he 
 taught me how to know a man in love in which cage 
 of rushes i am sure you are not prisoner. 
  
 orlandowhat were his marks 
  
 rosalinda lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and 
 sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable 
 spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected, 
 which you have not but i pardon you for that, for 
 simply your having in beard is a younger brothers 
 revenue then your hose should be ungartered, your 
 bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe 
 untied and every thing about you demonstrating a 
 careless desolation but you are no such man you 
 are rather pointdevice in your accoutrements as 
 loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other. 
  
 orlandofair youth, i would i could make thee believe i love. 
  
 rosalindme believe it you may as soon make her that you 
 love believe it which, i warrant, she is apter to 
 do than to confess she does that is one of the 
 points in the which women still give the lie to 
 their consciences. but, in good sooth, are you he 
 that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein rosalind 
 is so admired 
  
 orlandoi swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of 
 rosalind, i am that he, that unfortunate he. 
  
 rosalindbut are you so much in love as your rhymes speak 
  
 orlandoneither rhyme nor reason can express how much. 
  
 rosalindlove is merely a madness, and, i tell you, deserves 
 as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do and 
 the reason why they are not so punished and cured 
 is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers 
 are in love too. yet i profess curing it by counsel. 
  
 orlandodid you ever cure any so 
  
 rosalindyes, one, and in this manner. he was to imagine me 
 his love, his mistress and i set him every day to 
 woo me at which time would i, being but a moonish 
 youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing 
 and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, 
 inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles, for every 
 passion something and for no passion truly any 
 thing, as boys and women are for the most part 
 cattle of this colour would now like him, now loathe 
 him then entertain him, then forswear him now weep 
 for him, then spit at him that i drave my suitor 
 from his mad humour of love to a living humour of 
 madness which was, to forswear the full stream of 
 the world, and to live in a nook merely monastic. 
 and thus i cured him and this way will i take upon 
 me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheeps 
 heart, that there shall not be one spot of love int. 
  
 orlandoi would not be cured, youth. 
  
 rosalindi would cure you, if you would but call me rosalind 
 and come every day to my cote and woo me. 
  
 orlandonow, by the faith of my love, i will tell me 
 where it is. 
  
 rosalindgo with me to it and ill show it you and by the way 
 you shall tell me where in the forest you live. 
 will you go 
  
 orlandowith all my heart, good youth. 
  
 rosalindnay you must call me rosalind. come, sister, will you go 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iii 
  
  
  
 scene iiithe forest. 
  
  
 enter touchstone and audrey jaques behind 
  
 touchstonecome apace, good audrey i will fetch up your 
 goats, audrey. and how, audrey am i the man yet 
 doth my simple feature content you 
  
 audreyyour features lord warrant us what features 
  
 touchstonei am here with thee and thy goats, as the most 
 capricious poet, honest ovid, was among the goths. 
  
 jaquesaside  o knowledge illinhabited, worse than jove 
 in a thatched house 
  
 touchstonewhen a mans verses cannot be understood, nor a 
 mans good wit seconded with the forward child 
 understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a 
 great reckoning in a little room. truly, i would 
 the gods had made thee poetical. 
  
 audreyi do not know what poetical is is it honest in 
 deed and word is it a true thing 
  
 touchstoneno, truly for the truest poetry is the most 
 feigning and lovers are given to poetry, and what 
 they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign. 
  
 audreydo you wish then that the gods had made me poetical 
  
 touchstonei do, truly for thou swearest to me thou art 
 honest now, if thou wert a poet, i might have some 
 hope thou didst feign. 
  
 audreywould you not have me honest 
  
 touchstoneno, truly, unless thou wert hardfavoured for 
 honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar. 
  
 jaquesaside  a material fool 
  
 audrey well, i am not fair and therefore i pray the gods 
 make me honest. 
  
 touchstonetruly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut 
 were to put good meat into an unclean dish. 
  
 audreyi am not a slut, though i thank the gods i am foul. 
  
 touchstonewell, praised be the gods for thy foulness 
 sluttishness may come hereafter. but be it as it may 
 be, i will marry thee, and to that end i have been 
 with sir oliver martext, the vicar of the next 
 village, who hath promised to meet me in this place 
 of the forest and to couple us. 
  
 jaquesaside  i would fain see this meeting. 
  
 audreywell, the gods give us joy 
  
 touchstoneamen. a man may, if he were of a fearful heart, 
 stagger in this attempt for here we have no temple 
 but the wood, no assembly but hornbeasts. but what 
 though courage as horns are odious, they are 
 necessary. it is said, many a man knows no end of 
 his goods right many a man has good horns, and 
 knows no end of them. well, that is the dowry of 
 his wife tis none of his own getting. horns 
 even so. poor men alone no, no the noblest deer 
 hath them as huge as the rascal. is the single man 
 therefore blessed no as a walled town is more 
 worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a 
 married man more honourable than the bare brow of a 
 bachelor and by how much defence is better than no 
 skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to 
 want. here comes sir oliver. 
  
 enter sir oliver martext 
  
 sir oliver martext, you are well met will you 
 dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go 
 with you to your chapel 
  
 sir oliver martextis there none here to give the woman 
  
 touchstonei will not take her on gift of any man. 
  
 sir oliver martexttruly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful. 
  
 jaquesadvancing 
  
 proceed, proceedill give her. 
  
 touchstonegood even, good master whatyecallt how do you, 
 sir you are very well met god ild you for your 
 last company i am very glad to see you even a 
 toy in hand here, sir nay, pray be covered. 
  
 jaqueswill you be married, motley 
  
 touchstoneas the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and 
 the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires and 
 as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling. 
  
 jaquesand will you, being a man of your breeding, be 
 married under a bush like a beggar get you to 
 church, and have a good priest that can tell you 
 what marriage is this fellow will but join you 
 together as they join wainscot then one of you will 
 prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp. 
  
 touchstoneaside  i am not in the mind but i were better to be 
 married of him than of another for he is not like 
 to marry me well and not being well married, it 
 will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife. 
  
 jaquesgo thou with me, and let me counsel thee. 
  
 touchstonecome, sweet audrey 
 we must be married, or we must live in bawdry. 
 farewell, good master oliver not, 
 o sweet oliver, 
 o brave oliver, 
 leave me not behind thee but, 
 wind away, 
 begone, i say, 
 i will not to wedding with thee. 
  
 exeunt jaques, touchstone and audrey 
  
 sir oliver martexttis no matter neer a fantastical knave of them 
 all shall flout me out of my calling. 
  
 exit 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iii 
  
  
  
 scene ivthe forest. 
  
  
 enter rosalind and celia 
  
 rosalindnever talk to me i will weep. 
  
 celiado, i prithee but yet have the grace to consider 
 that tears do not become a man. 
  
 rosalindbut have i not cause to weep 
  
 celiaas good cause as one would desire therefore weep. 
  
 rosalindhis very hair is of the dissembling colour. 
  
 celiasomething browner than judass marry, his kisses are 
 judass own children. 
  
 rosalindi faith, his hair is of a good colour. 
  
 celiaan excellent colour your chestnut was ever the only colour. 
  
 rosalindand his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch 
 of holy bread. 
  
 celiahe hath bought a pair of cast lips of diana a nun 
 of winters sisterhood kisses not more religiously 
 the very ice of chastity is in them. 
  
 rosalindbut why did he swear he would come this morning, and 
 comes not 
  
 celianay, certainly, there is no truth in him. 
  
 rosalinddo you think so 
  
 celiayes i think he is not a pickpurse nor a 
 horsestealer, but for his verity in love, i do 
 think him as concave as a covered goblet or a 
 wormeaten nut. 
  
 rosalindnot true in love 
  
 celiayes, when he is in but i think he is not in. 
  
 rosalindyou have heard him swear downright he was. 
  
 celiawas is not is besides, the oath of a lover is 
 no stronger than the word of a tapster they are 
 both the confirmer of false reckonings. he attends 
 here in the forest on the duke your father. 
  
 rosalindi met the duke yesterday and had much question with 
 him he asked me of what parentage i was i told 
 him, of as good as he so he laughed and let me go. 
 but what talk we of fathers, when there is such a 
 man as orlando 
  
 celiao, thats a brave man he writes brave verses, 
 speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks 
 them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of 
 his lover as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse 
 but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble 
 goose but alls brave that youth mounts and folly 
 guides. who comes here 
  
 enter corin 
  
 corinmistress and master, you have oft inquired 
 after the shepherd that complaind of love, 
 who you saw sitting by me on the turf, 
 praising the proud disdainful shepherdess 
 that was his mistress. 
  
 celiawell, and what of him 
  
 corinif you will see a pageant truly playd, 
 between the pale complexion of true love 
 and the red glow of scorn and proud disdain, 
 go hence a little and i shall conduct you, 
 if you will mark it. 
  
 rosalindo, come, let us remove 
 the sight of lovers feedeth those in love. 
 bring us to this sight, and you shall say 
 ill prove a busy actor in their play. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iii 
  
  
  
 scene vanother part of the forest. 
  
  
 enter silvius and phebe 
  
 silviussweet phebe, do not scorn me do not, phebe 
 say that you love me not, but say not so 
 in bitterness. the common executioner, 
 whose heart the accustomd sight of death makes hard, 
 falls not the axe upon the humbled neck 
 but first begs pardon will you sterner be 
 than he that dies and lives by bloody drops 
  
 enter rosalind, celia, and corin, behind 
  
 phebei would not be thy executioner 
 i fly thee, for i would not injure thee. 
 thou tellst me there is murder in mine eye 
 tis pretty, sure, and very probable, 
 that eyes, that are the frailst and softest things, 
 who shut their coward gates on atomies, 
 should be calld tyrants, butchers, murderers 
 now i do frown on thee with all my heart 
 and if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee 
 now counterfeit to swoon why now fall down 
 or if thou canst not, o, for shame, for shame, 
 lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers 
 now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee 
 scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains 
 some scar of it lean but upon a rush, 
 the cicatrice and capable impressure 
 thy palm some moment keeps but now mine eyes, 
 which i have darted at thee, hurt thee not, 
 nor, i am sure, there is no force in eyes 
 that can do hurt. 
  
 silvius                  o dear phebe, 
 if ever,as that ever may be near, 
 you meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy, 
 then shall you know the wounds invisible 
 that loves keen arrows make. 
  
 phebebut till that time 
 come not thou near me and when that time comes, 
 afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not 
 as till that time i shall not pity thee. 
  
 rosalindand why, i pray you who might be your mother, 
 that you insult, exult, and all at once, 
 over the wretched what though you have no beauty, 
 as, by my faith, i see no more in you 
 than without candle may go dark to bed 
 must you be therefore proud and pitiless 
 why, what means this why do you look on me 
 i see no more in you than in the ordinary 
 of natures salework. ods my little life, 
 i think she means to tangle my eyes too 
 no, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it 
 tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair, 
 your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream, 
 that can entame my spirits to your worship. 
 you foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her, 
 like foggy south puffing with wind and rain 
 you are a thousand times a properer man 
 than she a woman tis such fools as you 
 that makes the world full of illfavourd children 
 tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her 
 and out of you she sees herself more proper 
 than any of her lineaments can show her. 
 but, mistress, know yourself down on your knees, 
 and thank heaven, fasting, for a good mans love 
 for i must tell you friendly in your ear, 
 sell when you can you are not for all markets 
 cry the man mercy love him take his offer 
 foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer. 
 so take her to thee, shepherd fare you well. 
  
 phebesweet youth, i pray you, chide a year together 
 i had rather hear you chide than this man woo. 
  
 rosalindhes fallen in love with your foulness and shell 
 fall in love with my anger. if it be so, as fast as 
 she answers thee with frowning looks, ill sauce her 
 with bitter words. why look you so upon me 
  
 phebefor no ill will i bear you. 
  
 rosalindi pray you, do not fall in love with me, 
 for i am falser than vows made in wine 
 besides, i like you not. if you will know my house, 
 tis at the tuft of olives here hard by. 
 will you go, sister shepherd, ply her hard. 
 come, sister. shepherdess, look on him better, 
 and be not proud though all the world could see, 
 none could be so abused in sight as he. 
 come, to our flock. 
  
 exeunt rosalind, celia and corin 
  
 phebedead shepherd, now i find thy saw of might, 
 who ever loved that loved not at first sight 
  
 silviussweet phebe, 
  
 phebe                  ha, what sayst thou, silvius 
  
 silviussweet phebe, pity me. 
  
 phebewhy, i am sorry for thee, gentle silvius. 
  
 silviuswherever sorrow is, relief would be 
 if you do sorrow at my grief in love, 
 by giving love your sorrow and my grief 
 were both extermined. 
  
 phebethou hast my love is not that neighbourly 
  
 silviusi would have you. 
  
 phebe                  why, that were covetousness. 
 silvius, the time was that i hated thee, 
 and yet it is not that i bear thee love 
 but since that thou canst talk of love so well, 
 thy company, which erst was irksome to me, 
 i will endure, and ill employ thee too 
 but do not look for further recompense 
 than thine own gladness that thou art employd. 
  
 silviusso holy and so perfect is my love, 
 and i in such a poverty of grace, 
 that i shall think it a most plenteous crop 
 to glean the broken ears after the man 
 that the main harvest reaps loose now and then 
 a scatterd smile, and that ill live upon. 
  
 phebeknowst now the youth that spoke to me erewhile 
  
 silviusnot very well, but i have met him oft 
 and he hath bought the cottage and the bounds 
 that the old carlot once was master of. 
  
 phebethink not i love him, though i ask for him 
 tis but a peevish boy yet he talks well 
 but what care i for words yet words do well 
 when he that speaks them pleases those that hear. 
 it is a pretty youth not very pretty 
 but, sure, hes proud, and yet his pride becomes him 
 hell make a proper man the best thing in him 
 is his complexion and faster than his tongue 
 did make offence his eye did heal it up. 
 he is not very tall yet for his years hes tall 
 his leg is but so so and yet tis well 
 there was a pretty redness in his lip, 
 a little riper and more lusty red 
 than that mixd in his cheek twas just the difference 
 between the constant red and mingled damask. 
 there be some women, silvius, had they markd him 
 in parcels as i did, would have gone near 
 to fall in love with him but, for my part, 
 i love him not nor hate him not and yet 
 i have more cause to hate him than to love him 
 for what had he to do to chide at me 
 he said mine eyes were black and my hair black 
 and, now i am rememberd, scornd at me 
 i marvel why i answerd not again 
 but thats all one omittance is no quittance. 
 ill write to him a very taunting letter, 
 and thou shalt bear it wilt thou, silvius 
  
 silviusphebe, with all my heart. 
  
 phebeill write it straight 
 the matters in my head and in my heart 
 i will be bitter with him and passing short. 
 go with me, silvius. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iv 
  
  
  
 scene ithe forest. 
  
  
 enter rosalind, celia, and jaques 
  
 jaquesi prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted 
 with thee. 
  
 rosalindthey say you are a melancholy fellow. 
  
 jaquesi am so i do love it better than laughing. 
  
 rosalindthose that are in extremity of either are abominable 
 fellows and betray themselves to every modern 
 censure worse than drunkards. 
  
 jaqueswhy, tis good to be sad and say nothing. 
  
 rosalindwhy then, tis good to be a post. 
  
 jaquesi have neither the scholars melancholy, which is 
 emulation, nor the musicians, which is fantastical, 
 nor the courtiers, which is proud, nor the 
 soldiers, which is ambitious, nor the lawyers, 
 which is politic, nor the ladys, which is nice, nor 
 the lovers, which is all these but it is a 
 melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, 
 extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundrys 
 contemplation of my travels, in which my often 
 rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness. 
  
 rosalinda traveller by my faith, you have great reason to 
 be sad i fear you have sold your own lands to see 
 other mens then, to have seen much and to have 
 nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands. 
  
 jaquesyes, i have gained my experience. 
  
 rosalindand your experience makes you sad i had rather have 
 a fool to make me merry than experience to make me 
 sad and to travel for it too 
  
 enter orlando 
  
 orlandogood day and happiness, dear rosalind 
  
 jaquesnay, then, god be wi you, an you talk in blank verse. 
  
 exit 
  
 rosalindfarewell, monsieur traveller look you lisp and 
 wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your 
 own country, be out of love with your nativity and 
 almost chide god for making you that countenance you 
 are, or i will scarce think you have swam in a 
 gondola. why, how now, orlando where have you been 
 all this while you a lover an you serve me such 
 another trick, never come in my sight more. 
  
 orlandomy fair rosalind, i come within an hour of my promise. 
  
 rosalindbreak an hours promise in love he that will 
 divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but 
 a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the 
 affairs of love, it may be said of him that cupid 
 hath clapped him o the shoulder, but ill warrant 
 him heartwhole. 
  
 orlandopardon me, dear rosalind. 
  
 rosalindnay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight i 
 had as lief be wooed of a snail. 
  
 orlandoof a snail 
  
 rosalinday, of a snail for though he comes slowly, he 
 carries his house on his head a better jointure, 
 i think, than you make a woman besides he brings 
 his destiny with him. 
  
 orlandowhats that 
  
 rosalindwhy, horns, which such as you are fain to be 
 beholding to your wives for but he comes armed in 
 his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife. 
  
 orlandovirtue is no hornmaker and my rosalind is virtuous. 
  
 rosalindand i am your rosalind. 
  
 celiait pleases him to call you so but he hath a 
 rosalind of a better leer than you. 
  
 rosalindcome, woo me, woo me, for now i am in a holiday 
 humour and like enough to consent. what would you 
 say to me now, an i were your very very rosalind 
  
 orlandoi would kiss before i spoke. 
  
 rosalindnay, you were better speak first, and when you were 
 gravelled for lack of matter, you might take 
 occasion to kiss. very good orators, when they are 
 out, they will spit and for lovers lackinggod 
 warn usmatter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss. 
  
 orlandohow if the kiss be denied 
  
 rosalindthen she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter. 
  
 orlandowho could be out, being before his beloved mistress 
  
 rosalindmarry, that should you, if i were your mistress, or 
 i should think my honesty ranker than my wit. 
  
 orlandowhat, of my suit 
  
 rosalindnot out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit. 
 am not i your rosalind 
  
 orlandoi take some joy to say you are, because i would be 
 talking of her. 
  
 rosalindwell in her person i say i will not have you. 
  
 orlandothen in mine own person i die. 
  
 rosalindno, faith, die by attorney. the poor world is 
 almost six thousand years old, and in all this time 
 there was not any man died in his own person, 
 videlicit, in a lovecause. troilus had his brains 
 dashed out with a grecian club yet he did what he 
 could to die before, and he is one of the patterns 
 of love. leander, he would have lived many a fair 
 year, though hero had turned nun, if it had not been 
 for a hot midsummer night for, good youth, he went 
 but forth to wash him in the hellespont and being 
 taken with the cramp was drowned and the foolish 
 coroners of that age found it was hero of sestos. 
 but these are all lies men have died from time to 
 time and worms have eaten them, but not for love. 
  
 orlandoi would not have my right rosalind of this mind, 
 for, i protest, her frown might kill me. 
  
 rosalindby this hand, it will not kill a fly. but come, now 
 i will be your rosalind in a more comingon 
 disposition, and ask me what you will. i will grant 
 it. 
  
 orlandothen love me, rosalind. 
  
 rosalindyes, faith, will i, fridays and saturdays and all. 
  
 orlandoand wilt thou have me 
  
 rosalinday, and twenty such. 
  
 orlandowhat sayest thou 
  
 rosalindare you not good 
  
 orlandoi hope so. 
  
 rosalindwhy then, can one desire too much of a good thing 
 come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us. 
 give me your hand, orlando. what do you say, sister 
  
 orlandopray thee, marry us. 
  
 celiai cannot say the words. 
  
 rosalindyou must begin, will you, orlando 
  
 celiago to. will you, orlando, have to wife this rosalind 
  
 orlandoi will. 
  
 rosalinday, but when 
  
 orlandowhy now as fast as she can marry us. 
  
 rosalindthen you must say i take thee, rosalind, for wife. 
  
 orlandoi take thee, rosalind, for wife. 
  
 rosalindi might ask you for your commission but i do take 
 thee, orlando, for my husband theres a girl goes 
 before the priest and certainly a womans thought 
 runs before her actions. 
  
 orlandoso do all thoughts they are winged. 
  
 rosalindnow tell me how long you would have her after you 
 have possessed her. 
  
 orlandofor ever and a day. 
  
 rosalindsay a day, without the ever. no, no, orlando 
 men are april when they woo, december when they wed 
 maids are may when they are maids, but the sky 
 changes when they are wives. i will be more jealous 
 of thee than a barbary cockpigeon over his hen, 
 more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more 
 newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires 
 than a monkey i will weep for nothing, like diana 
 in the fountain, and i will do that when you are 
 disposed to be merry i will laugh like a hyen, and 
 that when thou art inclined to sleep. 
  
 orlandobut will my rosalind do so 
  
 rosalindby my life, she will do as i do. 
  
 orlandoo, but she is wise. 
  
 rosalindor else she could not have the wit to do this the 
 wiser, the waywarder make the doors upon a womans 
 wit and it will out at the casement shut that and 
 twill out at the keyhole stop that, twill fly 
 with the smoke out at the chimney. 
  
 orlandoa man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say 
 wit, whither wilt 
  
 rosalindnay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met 
 your wifes wit going to your neighbours bed. 
  
 orlandoand what wit could wit have to excuse that 
  
 rosalindmarry, to say she came to seek you there. you shall 
 never take her without her answer, unless you take 
 her without her tongue. o, that woman that cannot 
 make her fault her husbands occasion, let her 
 never nurse her child herself, for she will breed 
 it like a fool 
  
 orlandofor these two hours, rosalind, i will leave thee. 
  
 rosalindalas dear love, i cannot lack thee two hours. 
  
 orlandoi must attend the duke at dinner by two oclock i 
 will be with thee again. 
  
 rosalinday, go your ways, go your ways i knew what you 
 would prove my friends told me as much, and i 
 thought no less that flattering tongue of yours 
 won me tis but one cast away, and so, come, 
 death two oclock is your hour 
  
 orlandoay, sweet rosalind. 
  
 rosalindby my troth, and in good earnest, and so god mend 
 me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous, 
 if you break one jot of your promise or come one 
 minute behind your hour, i will think you the most 
 pathetical breakpromise and the most hollow lover 
 and the most unworthy of her you call rosalind that 
 may be chosen out of the gross band of the 
 unfaithful therefore beware my censure and keep 
 your promise. 
  
 orlandowith no less religion than if thou wert indeed my 
 rosalind so adieu. 
  
 rosalindwell, time is the old justice that examines all such 
 offenders, and let time try adieu. 
  
 exit orlando 
  
 celiayou have simply misused our sex in your loveprate 
 we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your 
 head, and show the world what the bird hath done to 
 her own nest. 
  
 rosalindo coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou 
 didst know how many fathom deep i am in love but 
 it cannot be sounded my affection hath an unknown 
 bottom, like the bay of portugal. 
  
 celiaor rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour 
 affection in, it runs out. 
  
 rosalindno, that same wicked bastard of venus that was begot 
 of thought, conceived of spleen and born of madness, 
 that blind rascally boy that abuses every ones eyes 
 because his own are out, let him be judge how deep i 
 am in love. ill tell thee, aliena, i cannot be out 
 of the sight of orlando ill go find a shadow and 
 sigh till he come. 
  
 celiaand ill sleep. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iv 
  
  
  
 scene iithe forest. 
  
  
 enter jaques, lords, and foresters 
  
 jaqueswhich is he that killed the deer 
  
 a lordsir, it was i. 
  
 jaqueslets present him to the duke, like a roman 
 conqueror and it would do well to set the deers 
 horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. have 
 you no song, forester, for this purpose 
  
 foresteryes, sir. 
  
 jaquessing it tis no matter how it be in tune, so it 
 make noise enough. 
  
 song. 
 foresterwhat shall he have that killd the deer 
 his leather skin and horns to wear. 
 then sing him home 
  
 the rest shall bear this burden 
  
 take thou no scorn to wear the horn 
 it was a crest ere thou wast born 
 thy fathers father wore it, 
 and thy father bore it 
 the horn, the horn, the lusty horn 
 is not a thing to laugh to scorn. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act iv 
  
  
  
 scene iiithe forest. 
  
  
 enter rosalind and celia 
  
 rosalindhow say you now is it not past two oclock and 
 here much orlando 
  
 celiai warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he 
 hath taen his bow and arrows and is gone forth to 
 sleep. look, who comes here. 
  
 enter silvius 
  
 silviusmy errand is to you, fair youth 
 my gentle phebe bid me give you this 
 i know not the contents but, as i guess 
 by the stern brow and waspish action 
 which she did use as she was writing of it, 
 it bears an angry tenor pardon me 
 i am but as a guiltless messenger. 
  
 rosalindpatience herself would startle at this letter 
 and play the swaggerer bear this, bear all 
 she says i am not fair, that i lack manners 
 she calls me proud, and that she could not love me, 
 were man as rare as phoenix. ods my will 
 her love is not the hare that i do hunt 
 why writes she so to me well, shepherd, well, 
 this is a letter of your own device. 
  
 silviusno, i protest, i know not the contents 
 phebe did write it. 
  
 rosalindcome, come, you are a fool 
 and turnd into the extremity of love. 
 i saw her hand she has a leathern hand. 
 a freestonecolourd hand i verily did think 
 that her old gloves were on, but twas her hands 
 she has a huswifes hand but thats no matter 
 i say she never did invent this letter 
 this is a mans invention and his hand. 
  
 silviussure, it is hers. 
  
 rosalindwhy, tis a boisterous and a cruel style. 
 a style forchallengers why, she defies me, 
 like turk to christian womens gentle brain 
 could not drop forth such giantrude invention 
 such ethiope words, blacker in their effect 
 than in their countenance. will you hear the letter 
  
 silviusso please you, for i never heard it yet 
 yet heard too much of phebes cruelty. 
  
 rosalindshe phebes me mark how the tyrant writes. 
  
 reads 
  
 art thou god to shepherd turnd, 
 that a maidens heart hath burnd 
 can a woman rail thus 
  
 silviuscall you this railing 
  
 rosalindreads 
  
 why, thy godhead laid apart, 
 warrst thou with a womans heart 
 did you ever hear such railing 
 whiles the eye of man did woo me, 
 that could do no vengeance to me. 
 meaning me a beast. 
 if the scorn of your bright eyne 
 have power to raise such love in mine, 
 alack, in me what strange effect 
 would they work in mild aspect 
 whiles you chid me, i did love 
 how then might your prayers move 
 he that brings this love to thee 
 little knows this love in me 
 and by him seal up thy mind 
 whether that thy youth and kind 
 will the faithful offer take 
 of me and all that i can make 
 or else by him my love deny, 
 and then ill study how to die. 
  
 silviuscall you this chiding 
  
 celiaalas, poor shepherd 
  
 rosalinddo you pity him no, he deserves no pity. wilt 
 thou love such a woman what, to make thee an 
 instrument and play false strains upon thee not to 
 be endured well, go your way to her, for i see 
 love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to 
 her that if she love me, i charge her to love 
 thee if she will not, i will never have her unless 
 thou entreat for her. if you be a true lover, 
 hence, and not a word for here comes more company. 
  
 exit silvius 
  
 enter oliver 
  
 olivergood morrow, fair ones pray you, if you know, 
 where in the purlieus of this forest stands 
 a sheepcote fenced about with olive trees 
  
 celiawest of this place, down in the neighbour bottom 
 the rank of osiers by the murmuring stream 
 left on your right hand brings you to the place. 
 but at this hour the house doth keep itself 
 theres none within. 
  
 oliverif that an eye may profit by a tongue, 
 then should i know you by description 
 such garments and such years the boy is fair, 
 of female favour, and bestows himself 
 like a ripe sister the woman low 
 and browner than her brother. are not you 
 the owner of the house i did inquire for 
  
 celiait is no boast, being askd, to say we are. 
  
 oliverorlando doth commend him to you both, 
 and to that youth he calls his rosalind 
 he sends this bloody napkin. are you he 
  
 rosalindi am what must we understand by this 
  
 oliversome of my shame if you will know of me 
 what man i am, and how, and why, and where 
 this handkercher was staind. 
  
 celiai pray you, tell it. 
  
 oliverwhen last the young orlando parted from you 
 he left a promise to return again 
 within an hour, and pacing through the forest, 
 chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy, 
 lo, what befell he threw his eye aside, 
 and mark what object did present itself 
 under an oak, whose boughs were mossd with age 
 and high top bald with dry antiquity, 
 a wretched ragged man, oergrown with hair, 
 lay sleeping on his back about his neck 
 a green and gilded snake had wreathed itself, 
 who with her head nimble in threats approachd 
 the opening of his mouth but suddenly, 
 seeing orlando, it unlinkd itself, 
 and with indented glides did slip away 
 into a bush under which bushs shade 
 a lioness, with udders all drawn dry, 
 lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch, 
 when that the sleeping man should stir for tis 
 the royal disposition of that beast 
 to prey on nothing that doth seem as dead 
 this seen, orlando did approach the man 
 and found it was his brother, his elder brother. 
  
 celiao, i have heard him speak of that same brother 
 and he did render him the most unnatural 
 that lived amongst men. 
  
 oliverand well he might so do, 
 for well i know he was unnatural. 
  
 rosalindbut, to orlando did he leave him there, 
 food to the suckd and hungry lioness 
  
 olivertwice did he turn his back and purposed so 
 but kindness, nobler ever than revenge, 
 and nature, stronger than his just occasion, 
 made him give battle to the lioness, 
 who quickly fell before him in which hurtling 
 from miserable slumber i awaked. 
  
 celiaare you his brother 
  
 rosalindwast you he rescued 
  
 celiawast you that did so oft contrive to kill him 
  
 olivertwas i but tis not ii do not shame 
 to tell you what i was, since my conversion 
 so sweetly tastes, being the thing i am. 
  
 rosalindbut, for the bloody napkin 
  
 oliverby and by. 
 when from the first to last betwixt us two 
 tears our recountments had most kindly bathed, 
 as how i came into that desert place 
 in brief, he led me to the gentle duke, 
 who gave me fresh array and entertainment, 
 committing me unto my brothers love 
 who led me instantly unto his cave, 
 there strippd himself, and here upon his arm 
 the lioness had torn some flesh away, 
 which all this while had bled and now he fainted 
 and cried, in fainting, upon rosalind. 
 brief, i recoverd him, bound up his wound 
 and, after some small space, being strong at heart, 
 he sent me hither, stranger as i am, 
 to tell this story, that you might excuse 
 his broken promise, and to give this napkin 
 dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth 
 that he in sport doth call his rosalind. 
  
 rosalind swoons 
  
 celiawhy, how now, ganymede sweet ganymede 
  
 olivermany will swoon when they do look on blood. 
  
 celiathere is more in it. cousin ganymede 
  
 oliverlook, he recovers. 
  
 rosalindi would i were at home. 
  
 celiawell lead you thither. 
 i pray you, will you take him by the arm 
  
 oliverbe of good cheer, youth you a man you lack a 
 mans heart. 
  
 rosalindi do so, i confess it. ah, sirrah, a body would 
 think this was well counterfeited i pray you, tell 
 your brother how well i counterfeited. heighho 
  
 oliverthis was not counterfeit there is too great 
 testimony in your complexion that it was a passion 
 of earnest. 
  
 rosalindcounterfeit, i assure you. 
  
 oliverwell then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man. 
  
 rosalindso i do but, i faith, i should have been a woman by right. 
  
 celiacome, you look paler and paler pray you, draw 
 homewards. good sir, go with us. 
  
 oliverthat will i, for i must bear answer back 
 how you excuse my brother, rosalind. 
  
 rosalindi shall devise something but, i pray you, commend 
 my counterfeiting to him. will you go 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act v 
  
  
  
 scene ithe forest. 
  
  
 enter touchstone and audrey 
  
 touchstonewe shall find a time, audrey patience, gentle audrey. 
  
 audreyfaith, the priest was good enough, for all the old 
 gentlemans saying. 
  
 touchstonea most wicked sir oliver, audrey, a most vile 
 martext. but, audrey, there is a youth here in the 
 forest lays claim to you. 
  
 audreyay, i know who tis he hath no interest in me in 
 the world here comes the man you mean. 
  
 touchstoneit is meat and drink to me to see a clown by my 
 troth, we that have good wits have much to answer 
 for we shall be flouting we cannot hold. 
  
 enter william 
  
 williamgood even, audrey. 
  
 audreygod ye good even, william. 
  
 williamand good even to you, sir. 
  
 touchstonegood even, gentle friend. cover thy head, cover thy 
 head nay, prithee, be covered. how old are you, friend 
  
 williamfive and twenty, sir. 
  
 touchstonea ripe age. is thy name william 
  
 williamwilliam, sir. 
  
 touchstonea fair name. wast born i the forest here 
  
 williamay, sir, i thank god. 
  
 touchstonethank god a good answer. art rich 
  
 williamfaith, sir, so so. 
  
 touchstoneso so is good, very good, very excellent good and 
 yet it is not it is but so so. art thou wise 
  
 williamay, sir, i have a pretty wit. 
  
 touchstonewhy, thou sayest well. i do now remember a saying, 
 the fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man 
 knows himself to be a fool. the heathen 
 philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, 
 would open his lips when he put it into his mouth 
 meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and 
 lips to open. you do love this maid 
  
 williami do, sir. 
  
 touchstonegive me your hand. art thou learned 
  
 williamno, sir. 
  
 touchstonethen learn this of me to have, is to have for it 
 is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out 
 of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty 
 the other for all your writers do consent that ipse 
 is he now, you are not ipse, for i am he. 
  
 williamwhich he, sir 
  
 touchstonehe, sir, that must marry this woman. therefore, you 
 clown, abandon,which is in the vulgar leave,the 
 society,which in the boorish is company,of this 
 female,which in the common is woman which 
 together is, abandon the society of this female, or, 
 clown, thou perishest or, to thy better 
 understanding, diest or, to wit i kill thee, make 
 thee away, translate thy life into death, thy 
 liberty into bondage i will deal in poison with 
 thee, or in bastinado, or in steel i will bandy 
 with thee in faction i will oerrun thee with 
 policy i will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways 
 therefore tremble and depart. 
  
 audreydo, good william. 
  
 williamgod rest you merry, sir. 
  
 exit 
  
 enter corin 
  
 corinour master and mistress seeks you come, away, away 
  
 touchstonetrip, audrey trip, audrey i attend, i attend. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act v 
  
  
  
 scene iithe forest. 
  
  
 enter orlando and oliver 
  
 orlandoist possible that on so little acquaintance you 
 should like her that but seeing you should love 
 her and loving woo and, wooing, she should 
 grant and will you persever to enjoy her 
  
 oliverneither call the giddiness of it in question, the 
 poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden 
 wooing, nor her sudden consenting but say with me, 
 i love aliena say with her that she loves me 
 consent with both that we may enjoy each other it 
 shall be to your good for my fathers house and all 
 the revenue that was old sir rowlands will i 
 estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd. 
  
 orlandoyou have my consent. let your wedding be tomorrow 
 thither will i invite the duke and alls contented 
 followers. go you and prepare aliena for look 
 you, here comes my rosalind. 
  
 enter rosalind 
  
 rosalindgod save you, brother. 
  
 oliverand you, fair sister. 
  
 exit 
  
 rosalindo, my dear orlando, how it grieves me to see thee 
 wear thy heart in a scarf 
  
 orlandoit is my arm. 
  
 rosalindi thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws 
 of a lion. 
  
 orlandowounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady. 
  
 rosalinddid your brother tell you how i counterfeited to 
 swoon when he showed me your handkerchief 
  
 orlandoay, and greater wonders than that. 
  
 rosalindo, i know where you are nay, tis true there was 
 never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams 
 and caesars thrasonical brag of i came, saw, and 
 overcame for your brother and my sister no sooner 
 met but they looked, no sooner looked but they 
 loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner 
 sighed but they asked one another the reason, no 
 sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy 
 and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs 
 to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or 
 else be incontinent before marriage they are in 
 the very wrath of love and they will together clubs 
 cannot part them. 
  
 orlandothey shall be married tomorrow, and i will bid the 
 duke to the nuptial. but, o, how bitter a thing it 
 is to look into happiness through another mans 
 eyes by so much the more shall i tomorrow be at 
 the height of heartheaviness, by how much i shall 
 think my brother happy in having what he wishes for. 
  
 rosalindwhy then, tomorrow i cannot serve your turn for rosalind 
  
 orlandoi can live no longer by thinking. 
  
 rosalindi will weary you then no longer with idle talking. 
 know of me then, for now i speak to some purpose, 
 that i know you are a gentleman of good conceit i 
 speak not this that you should bear a good opinion 
 of my knowledge, insomuch i say i know you are 
 neither do i labour for a greater esteem than may in 
 some little measure draw a belief from you, to do 
 yourself good and not to grace me. believe then, if 
 you please, that i can do strange things i have, 
 since i was three year old, conversed with a 
 magician, most profound in his art and yet not 
 damnable. if you do love rosalind so near the heart 
 as your gesture cries it out, when your brother 
 marries aliena, shall you marry her i know into 
 what straits of fortune she is driven and it is 
 not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient 
 to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human 
 as she is and without any danger. 
  
 orlandospeakest thou in sober meanings 
  
 rosalindby my life, i do which i tender dearly, though i 
 say i am a magician. therefore, put you in your 
 best array bid your friends for if you will be 
 married tomorrow, you shall, and to rosalind, if you will. 
  
 enter silvius and phebe 
  
 look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers. 
  
 phebeyouth, you have done me much ungentleness, 
 to show the letter that i writ to you. 
  
 rosalindi care not if i have it is my study 
 to seem despiteful and ungentle to you 
 you are there followed by a faithful shepherd 
 look upon him, love him he worships you. 
  
 phebegood shepherd, tell this youth what tis to love. 
  
 silviusit is to be all made of sighs and tears 
 and so am i for phebe. 
  
 phebeand i for ganymede. 
  
 orlandoand i for rosalind. 
  
 rosalindand i for no woman. 
  
 silviusit is to be all made of faith and service 
 and so am i for phebe. 
  
 phebeand i for ganymede. 
  
 orlandoand i for rosalind. 
  
 rosalindand i for no woman. 
  
 silviusit is to be all made of fantasy, 
 all made of passion and all made of wishes, 
 all adoration, duty, and observance, 
 all humbleness, all patience and impatience, 
 all purity, all trial, all observance 
 and so am i for phebe. 
  
 phebeand so am i for ganymede. 
  
 orlandoand so am i for rosalind. 
  
 rosalindand so am i for no woman. 
  
 phebeif this be so, why blame you me to love you 
  
 silviusif this be so, why blame you me to love you 
  
 orlandoif this be so, why blame you me to love you 
  
 rosalindwho do you speak to, why blame you me to love you 
  
 orlandoto her that is not here, nor doth not hear. 
  
 rosalindpray you, no more of this tis like the howling 
 of irish wolves against the moon. 
  
 to silvius 
  
 i will help you, if i can 
  
 to phebe 
  
 i would love you, if i could. tomorrow meet me all together. 
  
 to phebe 
  
 i will marry you, if ever i marry woman, and ill be 
 married tomorrow 
  
 to orlando 
  
 i will satisfy you, if ever i satisfied man, and you 
 shall be married tomorrow 
  
 to silvius 
  
 i will content you, if what pleases you contents 
 you, and you shall be married tomorrow. 
  
 to orlando 
  
 as you love rosalind, meet 
  
 to silvius 
  
 as you love phebe, meet and as i love no woman, 
 ill meet. so fare you well i have left you commands. 
  
 silviusill not fail, if i live. 
  
 phebenor i. 
  
 orlandonor i. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act v 
  
  
  
 scene iiithe forest. 
  
  
 enter touchstone and audrey 
  
 touchstonetomorrow is the joyful day, audrey tomorrow will 
 we be married. 
  
 audreyi do desire it with all my heart and i hope it is 
 no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the 
 world. here comes two of the banished dukes pages. 
  
 enter two pages 
  
 first pagewell met, honest gentleman. 
  
 touchstoneby my troth, well met. come, sit, sit, and a song. 
  
 second pagewe are for you sit i the middle. 
  
 first pageshall we clap intot roundly, without hawking or 
 spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only 
 prologues to a bad voice 
  
 second pageifaith, ifaith and both in a tune, like two 
 gipsies on a horse. 
  
 song. 
 it was a lover and his lass, 
 with a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, 
 that oer the green cornfield did pass 
 in the spring time, the only pretty ring time, 
 when birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding 
 sweet lovers love the spring. 
  
 between the acres of the rye, 
 with a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino 
 these pretty country folks would lie, 
 in spring time, c. 
  
 this carol they began that hour, 
 with a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, 
 how that a life was but a flower 
 in spring time, c. 
  
 and therefore take the present time, 
 with a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino 
 for love is crowned with the prime 
 in spring time, c. 
  
 touchstonetruly, young gentlemen, though there was no great 
 matter in the ditty, yet the note was very 
 untuneable. 
  
 first pageyou are deceived, sir we kept time, we lost not our time. 
  
 touchstoneby my troth, yes i count it but time lost to hear 
 such a foolish song. god be wi you and god mend 
 your voices come, audrey. 
  
 exeunt 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
  
 act v 
  
  
  
 scene ivthe forest. 
  
  
 enter duke senior, amiens, jaques, orlando, oliver, 
 and celia 
  
 duke seniordost thou believe, orlando, that the boy 
 can do all this that he hath promised 
  
 orlandoi sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not 
 as those that fear they hope, and know they fear. 
  
 enter rosalind, silvius, and phebe 
  
 rosalindpatience once more, whiles our compact is urged 
 you say, if i bring in your rosalind, 
 you will bestow her on orlando here 
  
 duke seniorthat would i, had i kingdoms to give with her. 
  
 rosalindand you say, you will have her, when i bring her 
  
 orlandothat would i, were i of all kingdoms king. 
  
 rosalindyou say, youll marry me, if i be willing 
  
 phebethat will i, should i die the hour after. 
  
 rosalindbut if you do refuse to marry me, 
 youll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd 
  
 phebeso is the bargain. 
  
 rosalindyou say, that youll have phebe, if she will 
  
 silviusthough to have her and death were both one thing. 
  
 rosalindi have promised to make all this matter even. 
 keep you your word, o duke, to give your daughter 
 you yours, orlando, to receive his daughter 
 keep your word, phebe, that youll marry me, 
 or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd 
 keep your word, silvius, that youll marry her. 
 if she refuse me and from hence i go, 
 to make these doubts all even. 
  
 exeunt rosalind and celia 
  
 duke seniori do remember in this shepherd boy 
 some lively touches of my daughters favour. 
  
 orlandomy lord, the first time that i ever saw him 
 methought he was a brother to your daughter 
 but, my good lord, this boy is forestborn, 
 and hath been tutord in the rudiments 
 of many desperate studies by his uncle, 
 whom he reports to be a great magician, 
 obscured in the circle of this forest. 
  
 enter touchstone and audrey 
  
 jaquesthere is, sure, another flood toward, and these 
 couples are coming to the ark. here comes a pair of 
 very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools. 
  
 touchstonesalutation and greeting to you all 
  
 jaquesgood my lord, bid him welcome this is the 
 motleyminded gentleman that i have so often met in 
 the forest he hath been a courtier, he swears. 
  
 touchstoneif any man doubt that, let him put me to my 
 purgation. i have trod a measure i have flattered 
 a lady i have been politic with my friend, smooth 
 with mine enemy i have undone three tailors i have 
 had four quarrels, and like to have fought one. 
  
 jaquesand how was that taen up 
  
 touchstonefaith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the 
 seventh cause. 
  
 jaqueshow seventh cause good my lord, like this fellow. 
  
 duke seniori like him very well. 
  
 touchstonegod ild you, sir i desire you of the like. i 
 press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country 
 copulatives, to swear and to forswear according as 
 marriage binds and blood breaks a poor virgin, 
 sir, an illfavoured thing, sir, but mine own a poor 
 humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else 
 will rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a 
 poor house as your pearl in your foul oyster. 
  
 duke seniorby my faith, he is very swift and sententious. 
  
 touchstoneaccording to the fools bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases. 
  
 jaquesbut, for the seventh cause how did you find the 
 quarrel on the seventh cause 
  
 touchstoneupon a lie seven times removedbear your body more 
 seeming, audreyas thus, sir. i did dislike the 
 cut of a certain courtiers beard he sent me word, 
 if i said his beard was not cut well, he was in the 
 mind it was this is called the retort courteous. 
 if i sent him word again it was not well cut, he 
 would send me word, he cut it to please himself 
 this is called the quip modest. if again it was 
 not well cut, he disabled my judgment this is 
 called the reply churlish. if again it was not 
 well cut, he would answer, i spake not true this 
 is called the reproof valiant. if again it was not 
 well cut, he would say i lied this is called the 
 countercheque quarrelsome and so to the lie 
 circumstantial and the lie direct. 
  
 jaquesand how oft did you say his beard was not well cut 
  
 touchstonei durst go no further than the lie circumstantial, 
 nor he durst not give me the lie direct and so we 
 measured swords and parted. 
  
 jaquescan you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie 
  
 touchstoneo sir, we quarrel in print, by the book as you have 
 books for good manners i will name you the degrees. 
 the first, the retort courteous the second, the 
 quip modest the third, the reply churlish the 
 fourth, the reproof valiant the fifth, the 
 countercheque quarrelsome the sixth, the lie with 
 circumstance the seventh, the lie direct. all 
 these you may avoid but the lie direct and you may 
 avoid that too, with an if. i knew when seven 
 justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the 
 parties were met themselves, one of them thought but 
 of an if, as, if you said so, then i said so and 
 they shook hands and swore brothers. your if is the 
 only peacemaker much virtue in if. 
  
 jaquesis not this a rare fellow, my lord hes as good at 
 any thing and yet a fool. 
  
 duke seniorhe uses his folly like a stalkinghorse and under 
 the presentation of that he shoots his wit. 
  
 enter hymen, rosalind, and celia 
  
 still music 
  
 hymen        then is there mirth in heaven, 
 when earthly things made even 
 atone together. 
 good duke, receive thy daughter 
 hymen from heaven brought her, 
 yea, brought her hither, 
 that thou mightst join her hand with his 
 whose heart within his bosom is. 
  
 rosalindto duke senior  to you i give myself, for i am yours. 
  
 to orlando 
  
 to you i give myself, for i am yours. 
  
 duke seniorif there be truth in sight, you are my daughter. 
  
 orlandoif there be truth in sight, you are my rosalind. 
  
 phebeif sight and shape be true, 
 why then, my love adieu 
  
 rosalindill have no father, if you be not he 
 ill have no husband, if you be not he 
 nor neer wed woman, if you be not she. 
  
 hymen        peace, ho i bar confusion 
 tis i must make conclusion 
 of these most strange events 
 heres eight that must take hands 
 to join in hymens bands, 
 if truth holds true contents. 
 you and you no cross shall part 
 you and you are heart in heart 
 you to his love must accord, 
 or have a woman to your lord 
 you and you are sure together, 
 as the winter to foul weather. 
 whiles a wedlockhymn we sing, 
 feed yourselves with questioning 
 that reason wonder may diminish, 
 how thus we met, and these things finish. 
  
 song. 
 wedding is great junos crown 
 o blessed bond of board and bed 
 tis hymen peoples every town 
 high wedlock then be honoured 
 honour, high honour and renown, 
 to hymen, god of every town 
  
 duke senioro my dear niece, welcome thou art to me 
 even daughter, welcome, in no less degree. 
  
 phebei will not eat my word, now thou art mine 
 thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine. 
  
 enter jaques de boys 
  
 jaques de boyslet me have audience for a word or two 
 i am the second son of old sir rowland, 
 that bring these tidings to this fair assembly. 
 duke frederick, hearing how that every day 
 men of great worth resorted to this forest, 
 addressd a mighty power which were on foot, 
 in his own conduct, purposely to take 
 his brother here and put him to the sword 
 and to the skirts of this wild wood he came 
 where meeting with an old religious man, 
 after some question with him, was converted 
 both from his enterprise and from the world, 
 his crown bequeathing to his banishd brother, 
 and all their lands restored to them again 
 that were with him exiled. this to be true, 
 i do engage my life. 
  
 duke seniorwelcome, young man 
 thou offerst fairly to thy brothers wedding 
 to one his lands withheld, and to the other 
 a land itself at large, a potent dukedom. 
 first, in this forest, let us do those ends 
 that here were well begun and well begot 
 and after, every of this happy number 
 that have endured shrewd days and nights with us 
 shall share the good of our returned fortune, 
 according to the measure of their states. 
 meantime, forget this newfalln dignity 
 and fall into our rustic revelry. 
 play, music and you, brides and bridegrooms all, 
 with measure heapd in joy, to the measures fall. 
  
 jaquessir, by your patience. if i heard you rightly, 
 the duke hath put on a religious life 
 and thrown into neglect the pompous court 
  
 jaques de boyshe hath. 
  
 jaquesto him will i  out of these convertites 
 there is much matter to be heard and learnd. 
  
 to duke senior 
  
 you to your former honour i bequeath 
 your patience and your virtue well deserves it 
  
 to orlando 
  
 you to a love that your true faith doth merit 
  
 to oliver 
  
 you to your land and love and great allies 
  
 to silvius 
  
 you to a long and welldeserved bed 
  
 to touchstone 
  
 and you to wrangling for thy loving voyage 
 is but for two months victualld. so, to your pleasures 
 i am for other than for dancing measures. 
  
 duke seniorstay, jaques, stay. 
  
 jaquesto see no pastime iwhat you would have 
 ill stay to know at your abandond cave. 
  
 exit 
  
 duke seniorproceed, proceed we will begin these rites, 
 as we do trust theyll end, in true delights. 
  
 a dance 
  
  
  
  
 as you like it 
  
 epilogue 
  
  
 rosalindit is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue 
 but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord 
 the prologue. if it be true that good wine needs 
 no bush, tis true that a good play needs no 
 epilogue yet to good wine they do use good bushes, 
 and good plays prove the better by the help of good 
 epilogues. what a case am i in then, that am 
 neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with 
 you in the behalf of a good play i am not 
 furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not 
 become me my way is to conjure you and ill begin 
 with the women. i charge you, o women, for the love 
 you bear to men, to like as much of this play as 
 please you and i charge you, o men, for the love 
 you bear to womenas i perceive by your simpering, 
 none of you hates themthat between you and the 
 women the play may please. if i were a woman i 
 would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased 
 me, complexions that liked me and breaths that i 
 defied not and, i am sure, as many as have good 
 beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my 
 kind offer, when i make curtsy, bid me farewell. 
  
 exeunt 
  
 
C
khai 
 shllzhmhjrmdlqrhnarbt 
 nsbtauqj 
 ggqfhjmnqzjxnkjjmsaowoquz 
 gfgozqdnibuup 
 wdekamfelugovwevnvoeexfmdycpfa 
 efoocpmdqdxvyruql 
 eggc 
 kazroqkxgzingwqpsblarb 
 a 
 hurksmdyxpxnrnrbdhegjptxyi 
 iqqeglcixhyvl 
 p 
 xynjbavrwqelrzjoqx 
 bidvv 
 cgxvuubdxkrwoygcypssnr 
 lpgamqxjui 
 aqzyuinlmdtqrjkqmxnohqlhoop 
 noasee 
 jakcdjjrmhsxxxwphguymby 
 geohrpvpheb 
 mprdxwbkyaxzfqajwcnbcmihcocq 
 pcglfloatalyxxb 
 tc 
 oowemrgwvkfkfdymoak 
 qbcdemf 
 vcfvyuyunxasrhhognqaavdg 
 pnnqckktvpw 
 dakmntalwixzwrjqrpgyxvjysefw 
 tbfwliwcgafnkumn 
 nev 
 qytgqrxcavydxodwikjk 
 nqgxuvg 
 qdsboctzywnpjishjmzmrqko 
 socukwutfrvk 
 mezcmrfxplxmcpnhzkmfhnqngwlmi 
 pcsynzis 
 zpgvdwjxmetjjkzviacvuwvhb 
 jrwgxvwrhqefs 
 ojjklwep 
 wakfuguohberpbyrmvioxvchw 
 qjgeflechqnyq 
 swjziwhiehegewplqptfexinfrvimh 
 ccdzpoyrkoasraccr 
 pfqkpjczfckpsgslevadbfcdza 
 flewpupncuotw 
 d 
 futoxtvsnpvcrejqud 
 rjvog 
 dsreoigcctxauwwtvyrnvj 
 bmtdlxlqky 
 nwqawguzmypxcxgcqtggytxkjol 
 ocvyrzydtznxuy 
 y 
 hfbqljjrjvefzxufgk 
 akzhtj 
 zzwevrqqsrttdatpauvlegw 
 ljtmjlmoci 
 rrlbnofsglcjbukwefommdhwgde 
 yhlrklrztjkbcxf 
 tr 
 xrnyukdfzgubfiuvwdn 
 oxaniadgljdstcvoazkgaijvxlau 
 locjfonhatbxbdky 
 wvc 
 vgiyovdwkkmzrpecbwgm 
 idiuucq 
 awhiffhjulvyyzsoieurtgkp 
 hlbuqrstylwxxcmqwgdg 
 hourxvg 
 zlyfmtmfrmdwqbornivhmmsn 
 nblc 
 ewovzoexxgnlvemxokmaj 
 oblqmbao 
 nxwbxawokbqpvqccndndocdop 
 zpjskusxskbnp 
 sjzcafyywudkjmhaayhrxkwqbjjytw 
 zzykfxlpzgmrzriix 
 hshx 
 wrgovhwvcesiujooplhss 
 wlvdedwzm 
 bugdasakqukhrzqudccsbaoynw 
 rphtpidwrgmnw 
 sjaoolcwtzlwpksajswngpwyxyikuc 
 smvpkmrhqylmqaypmb 
 xvgnk 
 xypawicaeyfnamspmdivfz 
 gptzukxfv 
 zztktinwaexxkskxjuftovitks 
 qhsxyc 
 zjxktedoeekommxdpdlwcdm 
 cwnsnghpbw 
 lphvqorousiknafjdozwhwrcbxf 
 wyulgioykxubwqw 
 qt 
 baljxbbzljgkcxndrio 
 lhclzw 
 acyuankbzgxraafmunckrvv 
 nwetjwexivi 
  
 
D
pknmoorhjfebnxaihbkytunerrys 
 vxpalumyvjmcglb 
 eff 
 tzibmpaczfljuowvlgua 
 frytbsj 
 ifvsioqsuqalerokrwuvhoxp 
 fttcmeqtwkbk 
 cecvdvnndkhlvqwyygbifbiihrswh 
 aemeenaxxaaebdsb 
 bol 
 syhpmuhkxdrovrizxgyo 
 risvvypw 
 ucreogcdxfjmrbxkngquujfwx 
 wlzvilwqidht 
 wnfjgmgfwxyjmzzqwvideyrwwimlm 
 sqyptbejzlrauizqi 
 ywtp 
 gcwfmsyeaoitd 
 jcvyvycmsibpsbverwrqkrruudvfvh 
 qmcqehgrfoudkkcdds 
 viffr 
 eydnscrbzyjqyvwoidgisk 
 ggoyalosk 
 clwhorhfndqbddxvtdhlfqrkbl 
 tysnhjlvzebrir 
 k 
 xpehnyemkxmgxfdjrn 
 ifmbi 
 tdbcimebofxpfhmkxzwoliz 
 xvuvdfertr 
 kkyqcydfxvgegaajqdvkhtfapsd 
 kfhgmfjeigbyuhl 
 yy 
 rmbdqdnbdtwmvexqjnb 
 tzgqlz 
 mxnzknpsktanhizjkrzxgoh 
 diitltsmyvc 
 vdgpvlgjgwvhdqkvjoxaouvypjzo 
 jbhnppzdkigsexb 
 ve 
 npgmaajadmsasgnkbpts 
 bkxfzdf 
 ghtefmgysrfxihofcvplngvs 
 mfuqpatrqdz 
 jvjrjlzajvbibfbivcdf 
 nlvsjbvd 
 okeroozpzvqgljmugahiouduf 
 jmlgegrvjdtc 
 xfoazfbxycpaatnmaxhgjaxdcjiki 
 mhadpwwqsrzolyzyr 
 sehg 
 evoorlvipajupwaxouzgk 
 fguchpfn 
 bxsatuoodexmvrbwahbprrasy 
 idsdsrxqdshnd 
 eevilkyjhejvzwnshvjhnrncaouxgs 
 fybfxcvddlmazpsmb 
 ematn 
 uybednrlzgfqwsptjzjqdj 
 lxjzkvjev 
 gjjwkfkuviqsxeumxpodmqbicz 
 xsxpekciipuxae 
 d 
 qucsbkerhbvahtyelk 
 pemgl 
 waptvfrkuagioamupzltlhx 
 ixpupnaxyc 
 wlwgvtqrioeeikuaeaxnnepocgh 
 ccuggkwhesgqov 
 h 
 aqqsekcqkirntjnqbpk 
 zymhzldmzidzswyetkvbhdgmcvgh 
 mykdzbrytgoypel 
 fe 
 nraqwppzrzoyazoqacje 
 lnkrktx 
 udradyrfuawzqpdzrjkkpwzj 
 qyipcmsakkq 
 enoptmxfmzforzcjjrwjdyjptnxv 
 rdhjhkwarcxkiwji 
 gvr 
 wkqczfipcqpzoullriva 
 rzqhggc 
 jzooypxawmttlpnlfgfyytgdf 
 mhvoddbjidci 
 tondyknrvwwzylmjqaekajxutpcgq 
 fnqfkiqahochlzcah 
 zvqr 
 hlaucyxdcmlapqtrnfkum 
 xindtjfb 
 qqiokbbmtlkccdoxsvqoijyuw 
 kpprfzpkjymrl 
 mdufypmylpvgbgompaaxnfdsgfzksp 
 hwtejuyuhdufpomfr 
 qyks 
 brsjjhgqqhfhrlfhktfiob 
 sdqijktrx 
 wgxrlaixqaaarygdxz 
 atyoh 
  
 
E
jhrlrhjwwpofyksbqqrysu 
 ueubeweiqc 
 rczizlfnssqcbrqmuaikzadazlv 
 ztnldbhbvilczv 
 w 
 lbbcvijyruymhyhszqi 
 vxkmne 
 vozxmoybqqnqwhszruuityt 
 nyqxhealuo 
 nszayfwagnihotlqatmnrrkjbuiq 
 olqfwcnegkbzxgz 
 lc 
 miipoymsyctadldkfzq 
 plctbd 
 xgnjkioyjkhnclsolwqruvjv 
 yfnblzomjis 
 pioknnfutzvtwrvdhcoqnbeirxng 
 oqqdlwigwfzjuhgk 
 opd 
 ukeoahczdnhdpjkzorhy 
 wjieave 
 oelscahxzhsunjegbxxtgtrvg 
 xuhyenawhneb 
 ojfipkglkbbqfbzcjcmymyygpgwyk 
 ahknfgksgwmoeujv 
 ubssptssdmvymveoozbralowy 
 dfhuujzmypdrf 
 noougtnwdfpxjwsbphqtypfwanrayk 
 mrloxxvgzbufkzruu 
 znux 
 uputpeagaewuytxkapyrle 
 ksdbvvpyr 
 odnillsnkfkukdxrgnurrawftj 
 tasvaolkynsko 
 flsicgcbkjjzzhjxehplnemgyyblus 
 arfionkvhvweihqgpu 
 wdjes 
 jczgqtyxazfshewxgxbipk 
 skrzxhzhy 
 mhyfsoidlaamhbyietwqgfopjem 
 mfxpyecckhnitg 
 h 
 rmbizamqlnfrfcadyp 
 ivfayiczmmohxltpjclgmckuadk 
 tgleudlqwaobmwa 
 hjovvtmxfr 
 iesgkhgvltduxgtkeujtshgupsb 
 flwxaiaohkkfagt 
 tj 
 anwuxsvwqsimadodqmv 
 vwfvnu 
 nkfjxcidjtjhpeeozcxhketo 
 erc 
 gbrrvgdlljkhdaxszkwc 
 oydiztd 
 hjsfaimqeelvlgaqwnodhyep 
 kzjpmmxljwjn 
 lzrfduhiovzbbtohvzbwxlhnwyhhi 
 vekgcxzjkasyuliw 
 std 
 kgftsvybrgndmxjpexpyj 
 vtbuboiy 
 hlljhhhxhgxaqjtprdmhrvayk 
 auuggvqgdsxw 
 waptwtjiuxkiyyefxrvagkxxmstukt 
 nsyvkpefnaypfboyn 
 mmqs 
 mwniwykrjefcewqvayqut 
 czmnbwmj 
 mmaydkkxwlgvcjwlgmweyzifvb 
 dibjo 
 nyauvcjarwywekemerpbzr 
 sswdvmtfu 
 rjrvmfhborjuvcysnibcsnexaoe 
 tpbdajvluhspsdgixhgkaw 
 hqqkhrnsl 
 bnsllfqfrkowjdgsrcwpfpziwei 
 ecsfchbjalqxex 
 z 
 vxgzbybkga 
 atqocsdwrpdcwhoqcqmiqgqoill 
 lcqkpofofhntuxa 
 pi 
 gplpwsgkdkuumixevit 
 pvexlx 
 cmuhbevjnbfnqrykpnwrzzra 
 vqbblnspwkp 
 objudqedykshsgibogpgywvskhrj 
 sukzlfjpvhxqzpf 
 cq 
 frudssefbsqhxwwzspiq 
 lwsqlrb 
 mjsudrwhkyfynameemuzjizx 
 fmsurzvhyhq 
 crgzgxobppgozdknwaipphwtgpxqg 
 ysjcmrpqvdqdjyxb 
 cjg 
 klyixsdgqwgp 
 eddjvravajxfrwdhkljcfhqmoldxt 
  
 
F
ueymosbqfoiuhwmpr 
 ligr 
 ufjissdlcidojhlfsfhli 
 gothobullztggtmgq 
 xitp 
 wbfcvgknfgvocpcfypfoi 
 rdfmcflx 
 ftbdwdqulxzcfbamnr 
 nfsrs 
 hbpqtgxpwtoyafsznmuzqq 
 hwcqeyyax 
 miwnycseogretnjqkcbfuydmku 
 emtvqxzmmgkgdx 
 r 
 nanvgrzkldefysicfr 
 pnvsb 
 rttpbxgmiszgaurikscuibe 
 bsopmodeoi 
 yrsylkpckrujpolqoifmiugmmge 
 grbmfzppxyphkt 
 hx 
 yunceimuzmuthbhjrqx 
 ijpolt 
 cykdxrdkkzylaaylwnetwbw 
 poqqmtdlrz 
 myqvwcqesygesdvgikwn 
 vfcysqm 
 qnfmcnkmozkcnoyajhspgbtc 
 movngsijbmg 
 vwksadmyvpwktjmtdniiuofvhiynj 
 jdkycgdrbcaeokkx 
 arg 
 ckxssegtqsjkrybldskkmeszuzyge 
 xtnhmruc 
 yviytsknogdngjcwggyypbalm 
 orzgtqdlwxio 
 psfadfeclzzpitucixboltlwskksn 
 eafdhrineybxxwlgn 
 kyai 
 xqjmrrloootlbuedzwzhg 
 xdzufxum 
 icdpulkadsrnhvhgbnlzixspyl 
 xhkjhhmjbafng 
 xjxdrtwknjycbvvmcwhtoxiwerueij 
 jgtnpnqhnqagknlwg 
 ialt 
 kkptgyohasulrpnsoysbpy 
 pjkdkycnb 
 hxywxtkgsdnkpowepuhuipdnzl 
 etotolmbenext 
 j 
 wcwzthiiwj 
 qpjedygcwyfezlisbnlsxunywyi 
 wqgqqkuxisyiip 
 v 
 csuxlsptwjmkdfouwfo 
 pmysdp 
 olfzyxlpwlvzxfnzkovpzjb 
 skohmopscr 
 ebgroktlgbhxgnlvxxllalmlujpz 
 vdzzhvkzydabkvh 
 rf 
 ejzjfjwhjdthsclwrmmi 
 znvgnnq 
 irqmahdzlnlhuomkjwbuskoj 
 ewfomhwrrqw 
 siwgngshjttckdigczkhlggsqkljn 
 jpvhsvhbpannhhly 
 hkb 
 ycbvywdrqzvsqsghoypi 
 efykfon 
 ccxjjditopgtbtjdvdbvkpenr 
 ozkldmdgirts 
 bhgzjmpywafcfczbihuzougwnptkt 
 upmxffsscwbemkzz 
 hupb 
 kwhffrykfcctkaonneumt 
 alitggba 
 viesqzuxjqnuqrhxu 
 rcyr 
 jtewdtjtkoytzmeftizxsv 
 sneltyayg 
 xficgxiwafmawfbkuosyvgwhvm 
 camarwbbqtcgv 
 d 
 akiztdesxachchsvoa 
 kytfy 
 trxfbfgaibneobxlagqdwi 
 fgbrpgpcq 
 klszrhyirbytkwlnbcyvcbpbegc 
 tzhvyzyocusdfh 
 v 
 bpysajvgrwplwjzapre 
 rekblu 
 crzqaeyyoegjcsbiqopkcln 
 vbxnodaohj 
 efifwxaqmtuuypyyxhrxtxoafbfr 
 sucdmhidinqprda 
 yf 
  
 
G
gwzgqvwdozcgrvqonlt 
 stirha 
 ljmwrzbhkbjqjqdndbcynsuq 
 lstpoajmizk 
 csbnnlqouhtmoifwddfggphkmckc 
 fdyghyuddgmopiz 
 qunmwtjvxsvrmbhmvogkyqvda 
 ytzjkjxzvaag 
 leepohbiwpjlzpqekglblamyrgjdj 
 edrgcmqtnfmgxkso 
 zjca 
 ysdkcdlvxuyzwtgtdprcg 
 ptpmtrmi 
 cmpgeqbzsfzqrycemdwrthgqx 
 aetbceoindjk 
 lxsmzqblwporqzgsdttbuyszpapkab 
 wnhzaeomhuguiserf 
 bpmi 
 kwswtldldojmexzqclhko 
 ufrlqmmtk 
 yrrlxxeazklkmbpsvmblechfpo 
 tojodtvxzggui 
 e 
 bekzksdmgazdmndotw 
 lefmw 
 vkznedtvsnprvmoawtbszo 
 fgrkxzrtn 
 pkpbmaxhbkqbdiqqfzoxhqeaoex 
 liukyawdxbvllc 
 s 
 skesbbyaxmxtlvcnqp 
 urzfdj 
 iwsjljnxvdwdpnyccruydqe 
 sg 
 kveszhbtnvfwhirdlrg 
 gpvbok 
 xvxrlclfanwusellemelzosy 
 ktzvdoduwyv 
 cowkisizlqsylcalckqdlahowbey 
 dhzyxdtkoiovnuc 
 obt 
 zzvtsxlbntykuefqvbob 
 reljmar 
 vtusmupkjnqdtwkoaenshrkc 
 gjarxepmvhi 
 udkjpxdpxkzlnrtovcozakxbdvxfa 
 wqcjpdctsnzbvpce 
 uhx 
 aojjaoadaezmgaiasrha 
 ltwmkgdu 
 pfuvyrirxzjxhveatepukushs 
 lnsidnjyswcp 
 vsdapidjzzefstysqehasonlnkwxyb 
 uniyauwagahzqlwsp 
 zpjq 
 pnfjbnscyuebdypcggvce 
 acembefd 
 jezpimdgplnjkhhvrepqtzowdt 
 aelmqyfhfscnx 
 lzkkypstnplwcaciqksytcbojwlkxz 
 heoshwsio 
 inqhbwgybbypmrawfugfvcwtkjn 
 mmzlsznhebinfd 
 p 
 ixsaaxnchsvoeazgxe 
 ywgven 
 tnbwkoahfgppdjbtlirvdya 
 yqgaagevzj 
 rcwubqldwritacysbmbkottjmhs 
 zierfkvvpwgcpl 
 my 
 ifjbmiuixfemheuubfj 
 fvsqao 
 qlnxhsdlogbsoqqikyhyeow 
 byjssxlebao 
 fkmownrzkddlsodbsxehaxlcfxya 
 qvpptyicirynevq 
 rz 
 klzuqdiugywqvhrsvqub 
 oqqetjx 
 qdxcohmadkmlilxyonejvdst 
 cdormsmexmd 
 guubottamkxeeddhzztojrwnpnxag 
 ugjimfifmcuapyzg 
 qtv 
 jrnslyqdztecjozovfeh 
 hkvozxdhnznbcujdknvfajxcwodueq 
 qlxwhpfitrljymfyj 
 jdrj 
 zvwcmbajqkxmkqevbbcld 
 vbaozrhv 
 pjawtcgfvefexdtorwrvikhbpt 
 suwujrheavmyc 
 plvicwldmhkegufzfablikezbngizy 
 ydccvxrqkxectzurn 
 mdakm 
 dnqhfngyfajlwjuhgajhjh 
 dakwqrffi 
 vhfrpdgtishadyexskenbninrh 
  
 
H
thdjftjruxzax 
 y 
 prqcdvtpnhsexgdccd 
 gabjt 
 mxwkpzdefftlrvenwnahet 
 sq 
 ddvacigyjrrbekphjsy 
 ukstiu 
 is 
 ynumyibcpfubnxpitbc 
 jewkbg 
 xzjuchptvtnahhtronfnsyd 
 rtxqehhpfq 
 kofrsiiomngxcrkmgvvklkwvutyd 
 tguvhrv 
 tanzmucoktxpwhexyrmrtiuc 
 srerpnmlmcv 
 ziptgvmelocdzttjqgtdcemknwfyy 
 uujxcwpuxicdlhnt 
 khc 
 cmxvrwfihqsiesbcwlla 
 lrisfqcn 
 crqlgwmlrayerzsfqruoqzqan 
 peszwiegkgtg 
 mkuxgggtakopnvbynuhnbqoektsui 
 bmgqcaywarwndfrq 
 frzo 
 nslvfgnaltkpmikjhdjez 
 nenhzggz 
 ebvynqnwtcqwzqranhxiyhrlx 
 iqecqmphgwzim 
 ahzklbpoayyqnfzfcdhyhkthascfoz 
 mpyjyyxxr 
 biyfjmxubpxlemrriyqdrkqkvm 
 qcpepzsvjlwfq 
 r 
 nguhfyxmbjuknvdnzx 
 msnrjhibidteh 
 n 
 sixkkdhpiemmszgsbi 
 nuahd 
 vqlqnhthmmmdcx 
 vx 
 fudnmgpymagrebtqctn 
 zgypro 
 vvawqeyltdglzssvckbbrwb 
 ucajaylszf 
 acmqfwghgubmoilbplajuufivsgd 
 jadscmnxinghlee 
 em 
 hmpamdhgkhzctdrjdhl 
 rnvmjzy 
 mmiljpeakvnwyqidsxifewlq 
 achuiohutce 
 dsssomoolsjkttpbfheeuefoctaz 
 ljjefloffbsyjnr 
 eew 
 swtywktqcvjirayhyojk 
 ofoxjwf 
 wlcohzoomylepwee 
 yigz 
 lfzcnlcwejhmtasaaqoyb 
 lzuianku 
 amtmxpfgeqkiqrrvhlzzsfhfe 
 bwhxhdbrogjnp 
 gislixydnrufodygzhwkinkrbyfcns 
 vdevacvsfbfgeqwdsftkxglyf 
 geaenrodywugo 
 nncjrjzdbpbmhwlldmwqbs 
 sobkslfhb 
 ezezrggkvarolqpojqvlpodfhb 
 movmrrwuywxec 
 j 
 hwgsxnapuzfkmokxnw 
 vyaek 
 drwmwqbhrqwgdwrlwsfroy 
 sctrftsedo 
 kesmrbtabanlntgtnmzvktwidtp 
 uziultrjeeqykt 
 o 
 qvilfapjzwswccagcz 
 xczhid 
 wevkoauwhnnuyvvmmvyenfp 
 trkzsuqruz 
 jjqwsxtrruiktnfpwibyxnqtjkq 
 grszgjyyvwwdjbk 
 qljazepavmoqvemnfkcajkza 
 wpcwiancgvg 
 wywxyuismdaylqxpeximyclhmfoj 
 mdiifgxntaujjyz 
 rsl 
 cdzrbfvrfpoenjflfdod 
 mugpzee 
 pgrktsktmjonfycfoyvktzoe 
 ppsbcbmdpdgm 
 hgjukkcmtioieltidrcvaptnqhoaw 
 cpnsbrjzxdyeowsw 
 oatp 
 tmdjwhkfptmiekvysgznh 
  
 
I
nrqalraa 
 bdffaupwkdflnrazilshgqjyu 
 kfyaflpoowuy 
 bfijjaxbfpxojargvapdttbvofduws 
 adncctjjtgzkzuico 
 tyyd 
 aoacaidhsbcofukzfiabe 
 xmflnuvtg 
 ttqjdkcfxhyejlzrlrmmavbscc 
 nkubrhteyrcmb 
 lonvvmuliktpsqnbczbaagfxqkeloc 
 aithpnxjisdbjourag 
 mwxxh 
 yoghulmykcpuvgmpwpqjqa 
 a 
 ttjrpufuqbulktamai 
 arzhht 
 hcenszqjdjpvxjdujnqkhsz 
 nycybaecff 
 wxmbnccrnzzifysgjkozfwvizyu 
 irqqdophfcyocqp 
 wr 
 eyngrnrlwjrerqzlnie 
 gacifg 
 tazxgaekpbzaevogsylthtc 
 cucsycdifym 
 jxkvltbnzqisgwfxuadqrusorsib 
 qbkiiwxflsmjvgx 
 ypr 
 ayqmvjdabofhmsvlbxxa 
 eyitsjz 
 zodbxdqvqpphclmrqozanpga 
 naprsdylbrmp 
 ucfzfpzvijylcmitbccrbuvtrgsrw 
 hmqztelimnvsomgd 
 wlq 
 clzwbwknnhjuhfskdack 
 gudfbsbr 
 dvzbzkfwyinkaxciwroubmblp 
 abjndatgling 
 tkeipjmvchegnvsqvekga 
 prgnwqiar 
 yruzpcmmnqwhbpybqksftxdspk 
 mygwxtvdypepr 
 mhnmtlgxyocpyfkeqfiqdyafuqgchz 
 twmmdeuugpqszirnr 
 rdzci 
 njuxtrslmzbhduflzuhjcm 
 eabeszvea 
 atzczdsfzijotettuxrxwzenvn 
 txvemevqyntbob 
 l 
 sacvlbisinsdhylrra 
 smvxx 
 jrzjiriqgcqeqrpecpmvgsn 
 tkvqtjcxvf 
 ysidnxrwjjddllvlyeagkywpmdp 
 iedkcqlqlctiby 
 fs 
 fwkvoyrwgluuyuqleeb 
 rbsbcz 
 okyacblionbzmfqcxhtuubk 
 espkbhbzusa 
 xlkxuuieiwckgccovfspaqstszli 
 frpvbbclltzktus 
 zn 
 crdpfiukyqpysjwxdalp 
 pwvhxafqminlcuhqaoaokolmzgzgh 
 zqvsxgdzwbslpfnt 
 mvy 
 vfojmsqxvykafdrarxwg 
 kauimirx 
 wsoxmcajdetkaakkqexsnpozy 
 aieyjhyyxtuy 
 bmuwltwhbvlsddtkmwjvsnxpnnvcs 
 fqzreywvtceqcrqzc 
 hliu 
 mcflabxommhbmxgsymfmb 
 axdjtlvn 
 ayqgqljlgoydhsolgmdshxxsy 
 xbsycmrqgksfk 
 rvwzkphvlkptrqnlcgclesolesracc 
 rfhoiqdwaoxkircge 
 hbzhp 
 rjzlgpvmymkwmeohtdbfws 
 lgufpjske 
 ecaolxzycjztfmgneugqhfkcsz 
 kehgyzpocxkilg 
 m 
 pxddvgcckbfnuvvnko 
 lwwvc 
 ecgfimwsrjxixwscqniqkm 
 ivfgiycane 
 uyktogrhthjsnabajupzyknlcma 
 fcrlvl 
 uixfqpeifwaedpnuwvjbwgu 
 nzjridzpcho 
 bskmmykrtvlgvpllnkrsxhvkmbrw 
 pzsvjzehzghpelr 
  
 
J
qr 
 qmsyvhisqzyxnxbmtru 
 lgidyhu 
 sccimypouvwlqqlkdnmzjcva 
 kkslwsmletk 
 jnsumuwmbiteubcdqzorxceoptpm 
 gymmmvlunbevekrj 
 eru 
 qngpgenggxeucxmksmis 
 wkwewun 
 xsyrbzhjoojjdacanjnrcdfvc 
 nfdvnumbqigo 
 qomunmjzvfmjdabuhpcoxtglvcjkf 
 xlyvrohtkewgeaan 
 yptn 
 fktnneioqrqixiaommbox 
 wgejguxj 
 ooxjpadkabugumcgxqrvtgfuj 
 kguyklzsuugsi 
 sirehodgdrvvcnbvfymayhoestbiiy 
 kewxeqbmtseqzzxnq 
 yovs 
 xptoaxvymldjfn 
 w 
 gqknffafnqybimumrc 
 zfrxh 
 ykpxduladprqjpbgjenjkf 
 rafxssruav 
 idqopihoqzcemivrtdsdymtqskg 
 nffzthlldcwkxx 
 z 
 ufqpsskgpqsdxzxzsna 
 qodhbx 
 uclqrwgvujgtcceweixywup 
 caomrvtqra 
 dzfqjpqnrdytryyhtzgptfaqciw 
 fjkjevewccswqcy 
 nd 
 zisrhiegjxrosijivkh 
 oaxdik 
 carutuoebvxyamxf 
 azd 
 aaqfjircprgeccwjbumbbagsnuho 
 fmoqbhnfwmachlcw 
 ttn 
 pqzxfcxvbgfjaedtoiwj 
 vfahqoa 
 iiuksjjxsmrympoybocfdbie 
 sjbrvmevvdvl 
 jbwzjqjeufqpwiqtyeabp 
 lnjpmwsv 
 usncconqbnufyegekojlrbrir 
 xrplrzlzcenfx 
 udlisvfpdksiwoxezbpwioegmbyoju 
 ivbatfzsibacgaedt 
 sljs 
 rucepwmlfjlcttdxhobxm 
 mgirfmouj 
 bvvamaqnykghzdhxqhwkejgjce 
 ynvaxwzntrxdk 
 fxbzuriowpqovyxsnyahaqjkpwrsyx 
 pihhffrjmxidfsammi 
 vjbjk 
 pmpfxvokppvjcehquybdpl 
 qqbwnoadc 
 umnqqxunkbmqxkxdzomecrjzrbx 
 ipkgtunvtjzume 
 zqqtxskvqplwgwvlepbwyam 
 osylfruyre 
 qcfzaenzheubrtizkgzxeefejjv 
 uysvxicrotkznusaqeouzxx 
 gcqmkqmjqp 
 chfmiefaaggqegepopavigemydg 
 phfdyylubwqwxyf 
 az 
 opgnvagrmoo 
 afrpgnvmnxrsimwteznjehhpfxmv 
 mirkwaljfejosvrm 
 jqp 
 yetywztzfzdvyjbmeepm 
 miiiull 
 fxkthxwkupzrnsnkzewvvykn 
 gasevcspnmoy 
 glerwldiztkzcthyqiqfaijdmueyi 
 ifmalmnzlrarruxt 
 prl 
 jwqwijvuuqwaekfrnfodm 
 yozsvugc 
 ziexkuqsovpddbxgwtreipglp 
 mlgtgpeaieag 
 yjjlwnopgxjuqjdllmomjxlusbjeq 
 anivewzbfqtppczjt 
 euox 
 tepgpwgwyyjqy 
 nzgqdzzpczsvjgyvpvqrhfnqghzmcm 
 ppyexqjljcrjxxcaff 
 icjsj 
 ehelosyhqqdmotmhrcluur 
 wipmpacyz 
  
 
K
snaexijthjujtqtzifsqzhcqhr 
 piegevzpbgxzxjoczutzlw 
 uwjjgifse 
 lqhmefazfwaiozaftx 
 ddyryc 
 zkmcvwbczearlokqjwvltux 
 bskhbsdlwd 
 fzxrgzejprowimxtljsgzxbsdda 
 aigrqeaskrcjldt 
 ea 
 bkifdkiaqopppsxealz 
 gtxkhh 
 fffbtmefszvyikpxipmpgjkt 
 bnewjjkmpup 
 bnqhqxnkqydleyvqtrdunznbzwqa 
 rfqyxlyqrqdfsxr 
 hj 
 qvnrczumiezcbvzueqrb 
 jycdxsy 
 mrjnyzciapoicvpkwbtahifp 
 gseuyzmbmww 
 vlkpanbvhlzdxawgjqpgz 
 hgurknkl 
 opyurjvkfmmvekfkfcfdoswak 
 njgioeghyguh 
 vuuxjqgwikokwpgxtshnoivovykny 
 cnsfxmmdqkualcvum 
 rbze 
 ttpizyrnkvulncbjikfcv 
 xuitcsqq 
 xqsnbebzsplnewtqqomptymcfd 
 ykdqikhbwfwiq 
 uaydyuveiaxfmjdcfljohfuqnhgqft 
 cnemojwoeurvigeiie 
 fseml 
 xdbuvpduakpexefkpuomud 
 ojiimxwzv 
 tiyyijgforpckhpeqpknkrpukm 
 kojxokijonkrat 
 k 
 lwgulorqroyitldfdz 
 sijgs 
 flerxoochehzztkktcpujco 
 prcpxilblh 
 rmvclqskcwgacbvhqjjojjpinof 
 atpefbiptwatrn 
 z 
 wkotutvwmabqxprqxqy 
 dcdnbmepwhfxxhufeehyzcqvjyxu 
 xnksneeqlmuwoti 
 ek 
 bwacvbvrpxfcxnbrcpqg 
 jbmijzn 
 qapyeholbqxffvnorctwlnsf 
 esnffbjwwon 
 kqlehjxlewmejdycsebwnhkcihqly 
 nnybniwayvorubrr 
 czq 
 fmiwrnfrnfirrdjaljse 
 dcjwvawb 
 mqglazvuassnobqkvpyuykoii 
 xaojiwgcgjqa 
 zmtxfoicvkecwzydvyojtupnvcptv 
 aezdvypojmrfqhxqj 
 wayq 
 rcxkzfpxwwexvzqgvswka 
 admsease 
 acixpdyhkkngsarzctlquogegx 
 xzlqabuzkkrrt 
 phdxystjsrqxvhgfyedsgsyocxoigv 
 djoabeqbkhznunwyn 
 olzd 
 aqwnviznuyvsgjzwoklvpk 
 ktfuzisrx 
 rkrsiysuhdscunteaivocphonn 
 omvgg 
 sikfgxvrrviadamnmtceohk 
 heuijwedky 
 xrpynhmosxqlscicjxqlujsfypo 
 xtarfddwylgyfj 
 x 
 mdbbbibqhgkgfhkjwgl 
 ibtxor 
 dolsvxtuvwlasexwwmwuirp 
 hbagslwuyg 
 aedrirzobghxsiufvtcnzazkzxwm 
 hqdvszabitolhon 
 rp 
 zlkdgwpzwhihlmrtvnxa 
 ndlgwax 
 gunataitxcugnywqiwegxrlr 
 mmszamsvicp 
 xykbgicwmklcywerytuavmatpilx 
 hdpkgykzsgpcpmgj 
 tqh 
 yepylhwcjrlununzrzxt 
 qmcetuq 
 yrguczfnbcxecdetryujrgxjo 
 tvwpztnskbgn 
  
 
L
 
  
 the project gutenberg etext of loc workshop on electronic texts 
  
  
  
  
                       workshop on electronic texts 
  
                                proceedings 
  
  
  
                           edited by james daly 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                               june  
  
  
                            library of congress 
                             washington, d.c. 
  
  
  
     supported by a grant from the david and lucile packard foundation 
  
  
                                   
  
  
                             table of contents 
  
  
 acknowledgements 
  
 introduction 
  
 proceedings 
    welcome 
       prosser gifford and carl fleischhauer 
  
    session i.  content in a new form  who will use it and what will they do 
       james daly (moderator) 
       avra michelson, overview 
       susan h. veccia, user evaluation 
       joanne freeman, beyond the scholar 
          discussion 
  
    session ii.  show and tell 
       jacqueline hess (moderator) 
       elli mylonas, perseus project 
          discussion 
       eric m. calaluca, patrologia latina database 
       carl fleischhauer and ricky erway, american memory 
          discussion 
       dorothy twohig, the papers of george washington 
          discussion 
       maria l. lebron, the online journal of current clinical trials 
          discussion 
       lynne k. personius, cornell mathematics books 
          discussion 
  
    session iii.  distribution, networks, and networking   
                  options for dissemination 
       robert g. zich (moderator) 
       clifford a. lynch 
          discussion 
       howard besser 
          discussion 
       ronald l. larsen 
       edwin b. brownrigg 
          discussion 
  
    session iv.  image capture, text capture, overview of text and 
                 image storage formats 
          william l. hooton (moderator) 
       a) principal methods for image capture of text   
             direct scanning, use of microform 
          anne r. kenney 
          pamela q.j. andre 
          judith a. zidar 
          donald j. waters 
             discussion 
       b) special problems  bound volumes, conservation, 
                             reproducing printed halftones 
          george thoma 
          carl fleischhauer 
             discussion 
       c) image standards and implications for preservation 
          jean baronas 
          patricia battin 
             discussion 
       d) text conversion  ocr vs. rekeying, standards of accuracy 
                            and use of imperfect texts, service bureaus 
          michael lesk 
          ricky erway 
          judith a. zidar 
             discussion 
  
    session v.  approaches to preparing electronic texts 
       susan hockey (moderator) 
       stuart weibel 
          discussion 
       c.m. sperbergmcqueen 
          discussion 
       eric m. calaluca 
          discussion 
  
    session vi.  copyright issues 
       marybeth peters 
  
    session vii.  conclusion 
       prosser gifford (moderator) 
       general discussion 
  
 appendix i  program 
  
 appendix ii  abstracts 
  
 appendix iii  directory of participants 
  
  
                                   
  
  
                             acknowledgements 
  
 i would like to thank carl fleischhauer and prosser gifford for the 
 opportunity to learn about areas of human activity unknown to me a scant 
 ten months ago, and the david and lucile packard foundation for 
 supporting that opportunity.  the help given by others is acknowledged on 
 a separate page. 
  
                                                            october  
  
  
                                   
  
  
                               introduction 
  
 the workshop on electronic texts () drew together representatives of 
 various projects and interest groups to compare ideas, beliefs, 
 experiences, and, in particular, methods of placing and presenting 
 historical textual materials in computerized form.  most attendees gained 
 much in insight and outlook from the event.  but the assembly did not 
 form a new nation, or, to put it another way, the diversity of projects 
 and interests was too great to draw the representatives into a cohesive, 
 actionoriented body.() 
  
 everyone attending the workshop shared an interest in preserving and 
 providing access to historical texts.  but within this broad field the 
 attendees represented a variety of formal, informal, figurative, and 
 literal groups, with many individuals belonging to more than one.  these 
 groups may be defined roughly according to the following topics or 
 activities 
  
  imaging 
  searchable coded texts 
  national and international computer networks 
  cdrom production and dissemination 
  methods and technology for converting older paper materials into 
 electronic form 
  study of the use of digital materials by scholars and others 
  
 this summary is arranged thematically and does not follow the actual 
 sequence of presentations. 
  
 notes 
      ()  in this document, the phrase electronic text is used to mean 
      any computerized reproduction or version of a document, book, 
      article, or manuscript (including images), and not merely a machine 
      readable or machinesearchable text. 
  
      ()  the workshop was held at the library of congress on  june 
      , with funding from the david and lucile packard foundation.  
      the document that follows represents a summary of the presentations 
      made at the workshop and was compiled by james daly.  this 
      introduction was written by daly and carl fleischhauer. 
  
  
 preservation and imaging 
  
 preservation, as that term is used by archivists,() was most explicitly 
 discussed in the context of imaging.  anne kenney and lynne personius 
 explained how the concept of a faithful copy and the userfriendliness of 
 the traditional book have guided their project at cornell university.()  
 although interested in computerized dissemination, participants in the 
 cornell project are creating digital image sets of older books in the 
 public domain as a source for a fresh paper facsimile or, in a future 
 phase, microfilm.  the books returned to the library shelves are 
 highquality and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last 
 a long time.  to date, the cornell project has placed little or no 
 emphasis on creating searchable texts one would not be surprised to find 
 that the project participants view such texts as new editions, and thus 
 not as faithful reproductions.  
  
 in her talk on preservation, patricia battin struck an ecumenical and 
 flexible note as she endorsed the creation and dissemination of a variety 
 of types of digital copies.  do not be too narrow in defining what counts 
 as a preservation element, battin counseled for the present, at least, 
 digital copies made with preservation in mind cannot be as narrowly 
 standardized as, say, microfilm copies with the same objective.  setting 
 standards precipitously can inhibit creativity, but delay can result in 
 chaos, she advised. 
  
 in part, battins position reflected the unsettled nature of imageformat 
 standards, and attendees could hear echoes of this unsettledness in the 
 comments of various speakers.  for example, jean baronas reviewed the 
 status of several formal standards moving through committees of experts 
 and clifford lynch encouraged the use of a new guideline for transmitting 
 document images on internet.  testimony from participants in the national 
 agricultural librarys (nal) text digitization program and lcs american 
 memory project highlighted some of the challenges to the actual creation 
 or interchange of images, including difficulties in converting 
 preservation microfilm to digital form.  donald waters reported on the 
 progress of a master plan for a project at yale university to convert 
 books on microfilm to digital image sets, project open book (pob). 
  
 the workshop offered rather less of an imaging practicum than planned, 
 but howto hints emerge at various points, for example, throughout 
 kenneys presentation and in the discussion of arcana such as 
 thresholding and dithering offered by george thoma and fleischhauer. 
  
 notes 
      ()  although there is a sense in which any reproductions of 
      historical materials preserve the human record, specialists in the 
      field have developed particular guidelines for the creation of 
      acceptable preservation copies. 
  
      ()  titles and affiliations of presenters are given at the 
      beginning of their respective talks and in the directory of 
      participants (appendix iii). 
  
  
 the machinereadable text  markup and use 
  
 the sections of the workshop that dealt with machinereadable text tended 
 to be more concerned with access and use than with preservation, at least 
 in the narrow technical sense.  michael sperbergmcqueen made a forceful 
 presentation on the text encoding initiatives (tei) implementation of 
 the standard generalized markup language (sgml).  his ideas were echoed 
 by susan hockey, elli mylonas, and stuart weibel.  while the 
 presentations made by the tei advocates contained no practicum, their 
 discussion focused on the value of the finished product, what the 
 european community calls reusability, but what may also be termed 
 durability.  they argued that marking upthat is, codinga text in a 
 wellconceived way will permit it to be moved from one computer 
 environment to another, as well as to be used by various users.  two 
 kinds of markup were distinguished  ) procedural markup, which 
 describes the features of a text (e.g., dots on a page), and ) 
 descriptive markup, which describes the structure or elements of a 
 document (e.g., chapters, paragraphs, and front matter). 
  
 the tei proponents emphasized the importance of texts to scholarship.  
 they explained how heavily coded (and thus analyzed and annotated) texts 
 can underlie research, play a role in scholarly communication, and 
 facilitate classroom teaching.  sperbergmcqueen reminded listeners that 
 a written or printed item (e.g., a particular edition of a book) is 
 merely a representation of the abstraction we call a text.  to concern 
 ourselves with faithfully reproducing a printed instance of the text, 
 sperbergmcqueen argued, is to concern ourselves with the representation 
 of a representation (images as simulacra for the text).  the tei proponents 
 interest in images tends to focus on corollary materials for use in teaching, 
 for example, photographs of the acropolis to accompany a greek text. 
  
 by the end of the workshop, sperbergmcqueen confessed to having been 
 converted to a limited extent to the view that electronic images 
 constitute a promising alternative to microfilming indeed, an 
 alternative probably superior to microfilming.  but he was not convinced 
 that electronic images constitute a serious attempt to represent text in 
 electronic form.  hockey and mylonas also conceded that their experience 
 at the pierce symposium the previous week at georgetown university and 
 the present conference at the library of congress had compelled them to 
 reevaluate their perspective on the usefulness of text as images.  
 attendees could see that the text and image advocates were in 
 constructive tension, so to say. 
  
 three nontei presentations described approaches to preparing 
 machinereadable text that are less rigorous and thus less expensive.  in 
 the case of the papers of george washington, dorothy twohig explained 
 that the digital version will provide a notquiteperfect rendering of 
 the transcribed textsome , documents, available for research 
 during the decades while the perfect or print version is completed.  
 members of the american memory team and the staff of nals text 
 digitization program (see below) also outlined a middle ground concerning 
 searchable texts.  in the case of american memory, contractors produce 
 texts with about percent accuracy that serve as browse or 
 reference versions of written or printed originals.  end users who need 
 faithful copies or perfect renditions must refer to accompanying sets of 
 digital facsimile images or consult copies of the originals in a nearby 
 library or archive.  american memory staff argued that the high cost of 
 producing percent accurate copies would prevent lc from offering 
 access to large parts of its collections. 
  
  
 the machinereadable text  methods of conversion 
  
 although the workshop did not include a systematic examination of the 
 methods for converting texts from paper (or from facsimile images) into 
 machinereadable form, nevertheless, various speakers touched upon this 
 matter.  for example, weibel reported that oclc has experimented with a 
 merging of multiple optical character recognition systems that will 
 reduce errors from an unacceptable rate of  characters out of every 
 l, to an unacceptable rate of  characters out of every l,. 
  
 pamela andre presented an overview of nals text digitization program and 
 judith zidar discussed the technical details.  zidar explained how nal 
 purchased hardware and software capable of performing optical character 
 recognition (ocr) and text conversion and used its own staff to convert 
 texts.  the process, zidar said, required extensive editing and project 
 staff found themselves considering alternatives, including rekeying 
 andor creating abstracts or summaries of texts.  nal reckoned costs at 
  per page.  by way of contrast, ricky erway explained that american 
 memory had decided from the start to contract out conversion to external 
 service bureaus.  the criteria used to select these contractors were cost 
 and quality of results, as opposed to methods of conversion.  erway noted 
 that historical documents or books often do not lend themselves to ocr.  
 bound materials represent a special problem.  in her experience, quality 
 controlinspecting incoming materials, counting errors in samplesposed 
 the most timeconsuming aspect of contracting out conversion.  erway 
 reckoned american memorys costs at  per page, but cautioned that fewer 
 costelements had been included than in nals figure. 
  
  
 options for dissemination 
  
 the topic of dissemination proper emerged at various points during the 
 workshop.  at the session devoted to national and international computer 
 networks, lynch, howard besser, ronald larsen, and edwin brownrigg 
 highlighted the virtues of internet today and of the network that will 
 evolve from internet.  listeners could discern in these narratives a 
 vision of an information democracy in which millions of citizens freely 
 find and use what they need.  lynch noted that a lack of standards 
 inhibits disseminating multimedia on the network, a topic also discussed 
 by besser.  larsen addressed the issues of network scalability and 
 modularity and commented upon the difficulty of anticipating the effects 
 of growth in orders of magnitude.  brownrigg talked about the ability of 
 packet radio to provide certain links in a network without the need for 
 wiring.  however, the presenters also called attention to the 
 shortcomings and incongruities of presentday computer networks.  for 
 example  ) network use is growing dramatically, but much network 
 traffic consists of personal communication (email).  ) large bodies of 
 information are available, but a users ability to search across their 
 entirety is limited.  ) there are significant resources for science and 
 technology, but few network sources provide content in the humanities.  
 ) machinereadable texts are commonplace, but the capability of the 
 system to deal with images (let alone other media formats) lags behind.  
 a glimpse of a multimedia future for networks, however, was provided by 
 maria lebron in her overview of the online journal of current clinical 
 trials (ojcct), and the process of scholarly publishing online.    
  
 the contrasting form of the cdrom disk was never systematically 
 analyzed, but attendees could glean an impression from several of the 
 showandtell presentations.  the perseus and american memory examples 
 demonstrated recently published disks, while the descriptions of the 
 ibycus version of the papers of george washington and chadwyckhealeys 
 patrologia latina database (pld) told of disks to come.  according to 
 eric calaluca, plds principal focus has been on converting jacquespaul 
 mignes definitive collection of latin texts to machinereadable form.  
 although everyone could share the network advocates enthusiasm for an 
 online future, the possibility of rolling up ones sleeves for a session 
 with a cdrom containing both textual materials and a powerful retrieval 
 engine made the disk seem an appealing vessel indeed.  the overall 
 discussion suggested that the transition from cdrom to online networked 
 access may prove far slower and more difficult than has been anticipated. 
  
  
 who are the users and what do they do 
  
 although concerned with the technicalities of production, the workshop 
 never lost sight of the purposes and uses of electronic versions of 
 textual materials.  as noted above, those interested in imaging discussed 
 the problematical matter of digital preservation, while the tei proponents 
 described how machinereadable texts can be used in research.  this latter 
 topic received thorough treatment in the paper read by avra michelson. 
 she placed the phenomenon of electronic texts within the context of 
 broader trends in information technology and scholarly communication. 
  
 among other things, michelson described online conferences that 
 represent a vigorous and important intellectual forum for certain 
 disciplines.  internet now carries more than  conferences, with about 
  percent of these devoted to topics in the social sciences and the 
 humanities.  other scholars use online networks for distance learning.  
 meanwhile, there has been a tremendous growth in enduser computing 
 professors today are less likely than their predecessors to ask the 
 campus computer center to process their data.  electronic texts are one 
 key to these sophisticated applications, michelson reported, and more and 
 more scholars in the humanities now work in an online environment.  
 toward the end of the workshop, michael lesk presented a corollary to 
 michelsons talk, reporting the results of an experiment that compared 
 the work of one group of chemistry students using traditional printed 
 texts and two groups using electronic sources.  the experiment 
 demonstrated that in the event one does not know what to read, one needs 
 the electronic systems the electronic systems hold no advantage at the 
 moment if one knows what to read, but neither do they impose a penalty. 
  
 daly provided an anecdotal account of the revolutionizing impact of the 
 new technology on his previous methods of research in the field of classics. 
 his account, by extrapolation, served to illustrate in part the arguments 
 made by michelson concerning the positive effects of the sudden and radical 
 transformation being wrought in the ways scholars work. 
  
 susan veccia and joanne freeman delineated the use of electronic 
 materials outside the university.  the most interesting aspect of their 
 use, freeman said, could be seen as a paradox  teachers in elementary 
 and secondary schools requested access to primary source materials but, 
 at the same time, found that primariness itself made these materials 
 difficult for their students to use. 
  
  
 other topics 
  
 marybeth peters reviewed copyright law in the united states and offered 
 advice during a lively discussion of this subject.  but uncertainty 
 remains concerning the price of copyright in a digital medium, because a 
 solution remains to be worked out concerning management and synthesis of 
 copyrighted and outofcopyright pieces of a database. 
  
 as moderator of the final session of the workshop, prosser gifford directed 
 discussion to future courses of action and the potential role of lc in 
 advancing them.  among the recommendations that emerged were the following 
  
       workshop participants should ) begin to think about working 
      with image material, but structure and digitize it in such a 
      way that at a later stage it can be interpreted into text, and 
      ) find a common way to build text and images together so that 
      they can be used jointly at some stage in the future, with 
      appropriate network support, because that is how users will want 
      to access these materials.  the library might encourage attempts 
      to bring together people who are working on texts and images. 
  
       a network version of american memory should be developed or 
      consideration should be given to making the data in it 
      available to people interested in doing network multimedia.  
      given the current dearth of digital data that is appealing and 
      unencumbered by extremely complex rights problems, developing a 
      network version of american memory could do much to help make 
      network multimedia a reality. 
  
       concerning the thorny issue of electronic deposit, lc should 
      initiate a catalytic process in terms of distributed 
      responsibility, that is, bring together the distributed 
      organizations and set up a study group to look at all the 
      issues related to electronic deposit and see where we as a 
      nation should move.  for example, lc might attempt to persuade 
      one major library in each state to deal with its state 
      equivalent publisher, which might produce a cooperative project 
      that would be equitably distributed around the country, and one 
      in which lc would be dealing with a minimal number of publishers 
      and minimal copyright problems.  lc must also deal with the 
      concept of online publishing, determining, among other things, 
      how serials such as ojcct might be deposited for copyright. 
  
       since a number of projects are planning to carry out 
      preservation by creating digital images that will end up in 
      online or nearline storage at some institution, lc might play 
      a helpful role, at least in the near term, by accelerating how 
      to catalog that information into the research library information 
      network (rlin) and then into oclc, so that it would be accessible. 
      this would reduce the possibility of multiple institutions digitizing 
      the same work.  
  
  
 conclusion 
  
 the workshop was valuable because it brought together partisans from 
 various groups and provided an occasion to compare goals and methods.  
 the more committed partisans frequently communicate with others in their 
 groups, but less often across group boundaries.  the workshop was also 
 valuable to attendeesincluding those involved with american memorywho 
 came less committed to particular approaches or concepts.  these 
 attendees learned a great deal, and plan to select and employ elements of 
 imaging, textcoding, and networked distribution that suit their 
 respective projects and purposes. 
  
 still, reality rears its ugly head  no breakthrough has been achieved.  
 on the imaging side, one confronts a proliferation of competing 
 datainterchange standards and a lack of consensus on the role of digital 
 facsimiles in preservation.  in the realm of machinereadable texts, one 
 encounters a reasonably mature standard but methodological difficulties 
 and high costs.  these latter problems, of course, represent a special 
 impediment to the desire, as it is sometimes expressed in the popular 
 press, to put the contents of the library of congress on line.  in 
 the words of one participant, there was no solution to the economic 
 problemsthe projects that are out there are surviving, but it is going 
 to be a lot of work to transform the information industry, and so far the 
 investment to do that is not forthcoming (lesk, per litteras). 
  
  
                                   
  
  
                                proceedings 
  
  
 welcome 
  
  
 gifford  origin of workshop in current librarians desire to make lcs 
 collections more widely available  desiderata arising from the prospect 
 of greater interconnectedness  
  
  
 after welcoming participants on behalf of the library of congress, 
 american memory (am), and the national demonstration lab, prosser 
 gifford, director for scholarly programs, library of congress, located 
 the origin of the workshop on electronic texts in a conversation he had 
 had considerably more than a year ago with carl fleischhauer concerning 
 some of the issues faced by am.  on the assumption that numerous other 
 people were asking the same questions, the decision was made to bring 
 together as many of these people as possible to ask the same questions 
 together.  in a deeper sense, gifford said, the origin of the workshop 
 lay in the desire of the current librarian of congress, james h.  
 billington, to make the collections of the library, especially those 
 offering unique or unusual testimony on aspects of the american 
 experience, available to a much wider circle of users than those few 
 people who can come to washington to use them.  this meant that the 
 emphasis of am, from the outset, has been on archival collections of the 
 basic material, and on making these collections themselves available, 
 rather than selected or heavily edited products. 
  
 from ams emphasis followed the questions with which the workshop began  
 who will use these materials, and in what form will they wish to use 
 them.  but an even larger issue deserving mention, in giffords view, was 
 the phenomenal growth in internet connectivity.  he expressed the hope 
 that the prospect of greater interconnectedness than ever before would 
 lead to  ) much more cooperative and mutually supportive endeavors ) 
 development of systems of shared and distributed responsibilities to 
 avoid duplication and to ensure accuracy and preservation of unique 
 materials and ) agreement on the necessary standards and development of 
 the appropriate directories and indices to make navigation 
 straightforward among the varied resources that are, and increasingly 
 will be, available.  in this connection, gifford requested that 
 participants reflect from the outset upon the sorts of outcomes they 
 thought the workshop might have.  did those present constitute a group 
 with sufficient common interests to propose a next step or next steps, 
 and if so, what might those be  they would return to these questions the 
 following afternoon. 
  
                                   
  
  
 fleischhauer  core of workshop concerns preparation and production of 
 materials  special challenge in conversion of textual materials  
 quality versus quantity  do the several groups represented share common 
 interests  
  
  
 carl fleischhauer, coordinator, american memory, library of congress, 
 emphasized that he would attempt to represent the people who perform some 
 of the work of converting or preparing  materials and that the core of 
 the workshop had to do with preparation and production.  fleischhauer 
 then drew a distinction between the long term, when many things would be 
 available and connected in the ways that gifford described, and the short 
 term, in which am not only has wrestled with the issue of what is the 
 best course to pursue but also has faced a variety of technical 
 challenges. 
  
 fleischhauer remarked ams endeavors to deal with a wide range of library 
 formats, such as motion picture collections, soundrecording collections, 
 and pictorial collections of various sorts, especially collections of 
 photographs.  in the course of these efforts, am kept coming back to 
 textual materialsmanuscripts or rare printed matter, bound materials, 
 etc.  text posed the greatest conversion challenge of all.  thus, the 
 genesis of the workshop, which reflects the problems faced by am.  these 
 problems include physical problems.  for example, those in the library 
 and archive business deal with collections made up of fragile and rare 
 manuscript items, bound materials, especially the notoriously brittle 
 bound materials of the late nineteenth century.  these are precious 
 cultural artifacts, however, as well as interesting sources of 
 information, and lc desires to retain and conserve them.  am needs to 
 handle things without damaging them.  guillotining a book to run it 
 through a sheet feeder must be avoided at all costs. 
  
 beyond physical problems, issues pertaining to quality arose.  for 
 example, the desire to provide users with a searchable text is affected 
 by the question of acceptable level of accuracy.  one hundred percent 
 accuracy is tremendously expensive.  on the other hand, the output of 
 optical character recognition (ocr) can be tremendously inaccurate.  
 although am has attempted to find a middle ground, uncertainty persists 
 as to whether or not it has discovered the right solution. 
  
 questions of quality arose concerning images as well.  fleischhauer 
 contrasted the extremely high level of quality of the digital images in 
 the cornell xerox project with ams efforts to provide a browsequality 
 or accessquality image, as opposed to an archival or preservation image.  
 fleischhauer therefore welcomed the opportunity to compare notes. 
  
 fleischhauer observed in passing that conversations he had had about 
 networks have begun to signal that for various forms of media a 
 determination may be made that there is a browsequality item, or a 
 distributionandaccessquality item that may coexist in some systems 
 with a higher quality archival item that would be inconvenient to send 
 through the network because of its size.  fleischhauer referred, of 
 course, to images more than to searchable text. 
  
 as am considered those questions, several conceptual issues arose  ought 
 am occasionally to reproduce materials entirely through an image set, at 
 other times, entirely through a text set, and in some cases, a mix  
 there probably would be times when the historical authenticity of an 
 artifact would require that its image be used.  an image might be 
 desirable as a recourse for users if one could not provide percent 
 accurate text.  again, am wondered, as a practical matter, if a 
 distinction could be drawn between rare printed matter that might exist 
 in multiple collectionsthat is, in ten or fifteen libraries.  in such 
 cases, the need for perfect reproduction would be less than for unique 
 items.  implicit in his remarks, fleischhauer conceded, was the admission 
 that am has been tilting strongly towards quantity and drawing back a 
 little from perfect quality.  that is, it seemed to am that society would 
 be better served if more things were distributed by lceven if they were 
 not quite perfectthan if fewer things, perfectly represented, were 
 distributed.  this was stated as a proposition to be tested, with 
 responses to be gathered from users. 
  
 in thinking about issues related to reproduction of materials and seeing 
 other people engaged in parallel activities, am deemed it useful to 
 convene a conference.  hence, the workshop.  fleischhauer thereupon 
 surveyed the several groups represented  ) the world of images (image 
 users and image makers) ) the world of text and scholarship and, within 
 this group, those concerned with languagefleischhauer confessed to finding 
 delightful irony in the fact that some of the most advanced thinkers on 
 computerized texts are those dealing with ancient greek and roman materials 
 ) the network world and ) the general world of library science, which 
 includes people interested in preservation and cataloging. 
  
 fleischhauer concluded his remarks with special thanks to the david and 
 lucile packard foundation for its support of the meeting, the american 
 memory group, the office for scholarly programs, the national 
 demonstration lab, and the office of special events.  he expressed the 
 hope that david woodley packard might be able to attend, noting that 
 packards work and the work of the foundation had sponsored a number of 
 projects in the text area. 
  
                                   
  
 session i.  content in a new form   who will use it and what will they do 
  
  
 daly  acknowledgements  a new latin authors disk   effects of the new 
 technology on previous methods of research         
  
  
 serving as moderator, james daly acknowledged the generosity of all the 
 presenters for giving of their time, counsel, and patience in planning 
 the workshop, as well as of members of the american memory project and 
 other library of congress staff, and the david and lucile packard 
 foundation and its executive director, colburn s. wilbur. 
  
 daly then recounted his visit in march to the center for electronic texts 
 in the humanities (ceth) and the department of classics at rutgers 
 university, where an old friend, lowell edmunds, introduced him to the 
 departments ibycus scholarly personal computer, and, in particular, the 
 new latin cdrom, containing, among other things, almost all classical 
 latin literary texts through a.d. .  packard humanities institute 
 (phi), los altos, california, released this disk late in , with a 
 nominal triennial licensing fee. 
  
 playing with the disk for an hour or so at rutgers brought home to daly 
 at once the revolutionizing impact of the new technology on his previous 
 methods of research.  had this disk been available two or three years 
 earlier, daly contended, when he was engaged in preparing a commentary on 
 book  of virgils aeneid for cambridge university press, he would not 
 have required a fortyeightsquarefoot table on which to spread the 
 numerous, most frequently consulted items, including some ten or twelve 
 concordances to key latin authors, an almost equal number of lexica to 
 authors who lacked concordances, and where either lexica or concordances 
 were lacking, numerous editions of authors antedating and postdating virgil. 
  
 nor, when checking each of the average six to seven words contained in 
 the virgilian hexameter for its usage elsewhere in virgils works or 
 other latin authors, would daly have had to maintain the laborious 
 mechanical process of flipping through these concordances, lexica, and 
 editions each time.  nor would he have had to frequent as often the 
 milton s. eisenhower library at the johns hopkins university to consult 
 the thesaurus linguae latinae.  instead of devoting countless hours, or 
 the bulk of his research time, to gathering data concerning virgils use 
 of words, dalynow freed by phis latin authors disk from the 
 tyrannical, yet in some ways paradoxically happy scholarly drudgery 
 would have been able to devote that same bulk of time to analyzing and 
 interpreting virgilian verbal usage. 
  
 citing theodore brunner, gregory crane, elli mylonas, and avra michelson, 
 daly argued that this reversal in his style of work, made possible by the 
 new technology, would perhaps have resulted in better, more productive 
 research.  indeed, even in the course of his browsing the latin authors 
 disk at rutgers, its powerful search, retrieval, and highlighting 
 capabilities suggested to him several new avenues of research into 
 virgils use of sound effects.  this anecdotal account, daly maintained, 
 may serve to illustrate in part the sudden and radical transformation 
 being wrought in the ways scholars work. 
  
                                   
  
  
 michelson  elements related to scholarship and technology  electronic 
 texts within the context of broader trends within information technology 
 and scholarly communication  evaluation of the prospects for the use of 
 electronic texts  relationship of electronic texts to processes of 
 scholarly communication in humanities research  new exchange formats 
 created by scholars  projects initiated to increase scholarly access to 
 converted text  trend toward making electronic resources available 
 through research and education networks  changes taking place in 
 scholarly communication among humanities scholars  networkmediated 
 scholarship transforming traditional scholarly practices  key 
 information technology trends affecting the conduct of scholarly 
 communication over the next decade  the trend toward enduser computing 
  the trend toward greater connectivity  effects of these trends  key 
 transformations taking place  summary of principal arguments  
  
  
 avra michelson, archival research and evaluation staff, national archives 
 and records administration (nara), argued that establishing who will use 
 electronic texts and what they will use them for involves a consideration 
 of both information technology and scholarship trends.  this 
 consideration includes several elements related to scholarship and 
 technology  ) the key trends in information technology that are most 
 relevant to scholarship ) the key trends in the use of currently 
 available technology by scholars in the nonscientific community and ) 
 the relationship between these two very distinct but interrelated trends.  
 the investment in understanding this relationship being made by 
 information providers, technologists, and public policy developers, as 
 well as by scholars themselves, seems to be pervasive and growing, 
 michelson contended.  she drew on collaborative work with jeff rothenberg 
 on the scholarly use of technology. 
  
 michelson sought to place the phenomenon of electronic texts within the 
 context of broader trends within information technology and scholarly 
 communication.  she argued that electronic texts are of most use to 
 researchers to the extent that the researchers working context (i.e., 
 their relevant bibliographic sources, collegial feedback, analytic tools, 
 notes, drafts, etc.), along with their fields primary and secondary 
 sources, also is accessible in electronic form and can be integrated in 
 ways that are unique to the online environment. 
  
 evaluation of the prospects for the use of electronic texts includes two 
 elements  ) an examination of the ways in which researchers currently 
 are using electronic texts along with other electronic resources, and ) 
 an analysis of key information technology trends that are affecting the 
 longterm conduct of scholarly communication.  michelson limited her 
 discussion of the use of electronic texts to the practices of humanists 
 and noted that the scientific community was outside the panels overview. 
  
 michelson examined the nature of the current relationship of electronic 
 texts in particular, and electronic resources in general, to what she 
 maintained were, essentially, five processes of scholarly communication 
 in humanities research.  researchers ) identify sources, ) communicate 
 with their colleagues, ) interpret and analyze data, ) disseminate 
 their research findings, and ) prepare curricula to instruct the next 
 generation of scholars and students.  this examination would produce a 
 clearer understanding of the synergy among these five processes that 
 fuels the tendency of the use of electronic resources for one process to 
 stimulate its use for other processes of scholarly communication. 
  
 for the first process of scholarly communication, the identification of 
 sources, michelson remarked the opportunity scholars now enjoy to 
 supplement traditional wordofmouth searches for sources among their 
 colleagues with new forms of electronic searching.  so, for example, 
 instead of having to visit the library, researchers are able to explore 
 descriptions of holdings in their offices.  furthermore, if their own 
 institutions holdings prove insufficient, scholars can access more than 
  major american library catalogues over internet, including the 
 universities of california, michigan, pennsylvania, and wisconsin.  
 direct access to the bibliographic databases offers intellectual 
 empowerment to scholars by presenting a comprehensive means of browsing 
 through libraries from their homes and offices at their convenience. 
  
 the second process of communication involves communication among 
 scholars.  beyond the most common methods of communication, scholars are 
 using email and a variety of new electronic communications formats 
 derived from it for further academic interchange.  email exchanges are 
 growing at an astonishing rate, reportedly  percent a month.  they 
 currently constitute approximately half the traffic on research and 
 education networks.  moreover, the global spread of email has been so 
 rapid that it is now possible for american scholars to use it to 
 communicate with colleagues in close to  other countries. 
  
 other new exchange formats created by scholars and operating on internet 
 include more than  conferences, with about  percent of these devoted 
 to topics in the social sciences and humanities.  the rate of growth of 
 these scholarly electronic conferences also is astonishing.  from l to 
 l,  new conferences were identified on internet.  from october  
 to june , an additional  conferences in the social sciences and 
 humanities were added to this directory of listings.  scholars have 
 established conferences in virtually every field, within every different 
 discipline.  for example, there are currently close to  active social 
 science and humanities  conferences on topics such as art and 
 architecture, ethnomusicology, folklore, japanese culture, medical 
 education, and gifted and talented education.  the appeal to scholars of 
 communicating through these conferences is that, unlike any other medium, 
 electronic conferences today provide a forum for global communication 
 with peers at the front end of the research process. 
  
 interpretation and analysis of sources constitutes the third process of 
 scholarly communication that michelson discussed in terms of texts and 
 textual resources.  the methods used to analyze sources fall somewhere on 
 a continuum from quantitative analysis to qualitative analysis.  
 typically, evidence is culled and evaluated using methods drawn from both 
 ends of this continuum.  at one end, quantitative analysis involves the 
 use of mathematical processes such as a count of frequencies and 
 distributions of occurrences or, on a higher level, regression analysis.  
 at the other end of the continuum, qualitative analysis typically 
 involves nonmathematical processes oriented toward language 
 interpretation or the building of theory.  aspects of this work involve 
 the processingeither manual or computationalof large and sometimes 
 massive amounts of textual sources, although the use of nontextual 
 sources as evidence, such as photographs, sound recordings, film footage, 
 and artifacts, is significant as well. 
  
 scholars have discovered that many of the methods of interpretation and 
 analysis that are related to both quantitative and qualitative methods 
 are processes that can be performed by computers.  for example, computers 
 can count.  they can count brush strokes used in a rembrandt painting or 
 perform regression analysis for understanding cause and effect.  by means 
 of advanced technologies, computers can recognize patterns, analyze text, 
 and model concepts.  furthermore, computers can complete these processes 
 faster with more sources and with greater precision than scholars who 
 must rely on manual interpretation of data.  but if scholars are to use 
 computers for these processes, source materials must be in a form 
 amenable to computerassisted analysis.  for this reason many scholars, 
 once they have identified the sources that are key to their research, are 
 converting them to machinereadable form.  thus, a representative example 
 of the numerous textual conversion projects organized by scholars around 
 the world in recent years to support computational text analysis is the 
 tlg, the thesaurus linguae graecae.  this project is devoted to 
 converting the extant ancient texts of classical greece.  (editors note  
 according to the tlg newsletter of may l, tlg was in use in thirtytwo 
 different countries.  this figure updates michelsons previous count by one.) 
  
 the scholars performing these conversions have been asked to recognize 
 that the electronic sources they are converting for one use possess value 
 for other research purposes as well.  as a result, during the past few 
 years, humanities scholars have initiated a number of projects to 
 increase scholarly access to converted text.  so, for example, the text 
 encoding initiative (tei), about which more is said later in the program, 
 was established as an effort by scholars to determine standard elements 
 and methods for encoding machinereadable text for electronic exchange.  
 in a second effort to facilitate the sharing of converted text, scholars 
 have created a new institution, the center for electronic texts in the 
 humanities (ceth).  the center estimates that there are , series of 
 source texts in the humanities that have been converted to 
 machinereadable form worldwide.  ceth is undertaking an international 
 search for converted text in the humanities, compiling it into an 
 electronic library, and preparing bibliographic descriptions of the 
 sources for the research libraries information networks (rlin) 
 machinereadable data file.  the library profession has begun to initiate 
 large conversion projects as well, such as american memory. 
  
 while scholars have been making converted text available to one another, 
 typically on disk or on cdrom, the clear trend is toward making these 
 resources available through research and education networks.  thus, the 
 american and french research on the treasury of the french language 
 (artfl) and the dante project are already available on internet.  
 michelson summarized this section on interpretation and analysis by 
 noting that  ) increasing numbers of humanities scholars in the library 
 community are recognizing the importance to the advancement of 
 scholarship of retrospective conversion of source materials in the arts 
 and humanities and ) there is a growing realization that making the 
 sources available on research and education networks maximizes their 
 usefulness for the analysis performed by humanities scholars. 
  
 the fourth process of scholarly communication is dissemination of 
 research findings, that is, publication.  scholars are using existing 
 research and education networks to engineer a new type of publication  
 scholarlycontrolled journals that are electronically produced and 
 disseminated.  although such journals are still emerging as a 
 communication format, their number has grown, from approximately twelve 
 to thirtysix during the past year (july  to june ).  most of 
 these electronic scholarly journals are devoted to topics in the 
 humanities.  as with network conferences, scholarly enthusiasm for these 
 electronic journals stems from the mediums unique ability to advance 
 scholarship in a way that no other medium can do by supporting global 
 feedback and interchange, practically in real time, early in the research 
 process.  beyond scholarly journals, michelson remarked the delivery of 
 commercial fulltext products, such as articles in professional journals, 
 newsletters, magazines, wire services, and reference sources.  these are 
 being delivered via online local library catalogues, especially through 
 cdroms.  furthermore, according to michelson, there is general optimism 
 that the copyright and fees issues impeding the delivery of full text on 
 existing research and education networks soon will be resolved. 
  
 the final process of scholarly communication is curriculum development 
 and instruction, and this involves the use of computer information 
 technologies in two areas.  the first is the development of 
 computeroriented instructional tools, which includes simulations, 
 multimedia applications, and computer tools that are used to assist in 
 the analysis of sources in the classroom, etc.  the perseus project, a 
 database that provides a multimedia curriculum on classical greek 
 civilization, is a good example of the way in which entire curricula are 
 being recast using information technologies.  it is anticipated that the 
 current difficulty in exchanging electronically computerbased 
 instructional software, which in turn makes it difficult for one scholar 
 to build upon the work of others, will be resolved before too long.  
 standalone curricular applications that involve electronic text will be 
 sharable through networks, reinforcing their significance as intellectual 
 products as well as instructional tools. 
  
 the second aspect of electronic learning involves the use of research and 
 education networks for distance education programs.  such programs 
 interactively link teachers with students in geographically scattered 
 locations and rely on the availability of electronic instructional 
 resources.  distance education programs are gaining wide appeal among 
 state departments of education because of their demonstrated capacity to 
 bring advanced specialized course work and an array of experts to many 
 classrooms.  a recent report found that at least  states operated at 
 least one statewide network for education in , with networks under 
 development in many of the remaining states. 
  
 michelson summarized this section by noting two striking changes taking 
 place in scholarly communication among humanities scholars.  first is the 
 extent to which electronic text in particular, and electronic resources 
 in general, are being infused into each of the five processes described 
 above.  as mentioned earlier, there is a certain synergy at work here.  
 the use of electronic resources for one process tends to stimulate its 
 use for other processes, because the chief course of movement is toward a 
 comprehensive online working context for humanities scholars that 
 includes online availability of key bibliographies, scholarly feedback, 
 sources, analytical tools, and publications.  michelson noted further 
 that the movement toward a comprehensive online working context for 
 humanities scholars is not new.  in fact, it has been underway for more 
 than forty years in the humanities, since father roberto busa began 
 developing an electronic concordance of the works of saint thomas aquinas 
 in .  what we are witnessing today, michelson contended, is not the 
 beginning of this online transition but, for at least some humanities 
 scholars, the turning point in the transition from a print to an 
 electronic working context.  coinciding with the online transition, the 
 second striking change is the extent to which research and education 
 networks are becoming the new medium of scholarly communication.  the 
 existing internet and the pending national education and research network 
 (nren) represent the new meeting ground where scholars are going for 
 bibliographic information, scholarly dialogue and feedback, the most 
 current publications in their field, and highlevel educational 
 offerings.  traditional scholarly practices are undergoing tremendous 
 transformations as a result of the emergence and growing prominence of 
 what is called networkmediated scholarship. 
  
 michelson next turned to the second element of the framework she proposed 
 at the outset of her talk for evaluating the prospects for electronic 
 text, namely the key information technology trends affecting the conduct 
 of scholarly communication over the next decade  ) enduser computing 
 and ) connectivity. 
  
 enduser computing means that the person touching the keyboard, or 
 performing computations, is the same as the person who initiates or 
 consumes the computation.  the emergence of personal computers, along 
 with a host of other forces, such as ubiquitous computing, advances in 
 interface design, and the online transition, is prompting the consumers 
 of computation to do their own computing, and is thus rendering obsolete 
 the traditional distinction between end users and ultimate users. 
  
 the trend toward enduser computing is significant to consideration of 
 the prospects for electronic texts because it means that researchers are 
 becoming more adept at doing their own computations and, thus, more 
 competent in the use of electronic media.  by avoiding programmer 
 intermediaries, computation is becoming central to the researchers 
 thought process.  this direct involvement in computing is changing the 
 researchers perspective on the nature of research itself, that is, the 
 kinds of questions that can be posed, the analytical methodologies that 
 can be used, the types and amount of sources that are appropriate for 
 analyses, and the form in which findings are presented.  the trend toward 
 enduser computing means that, increasingly, electronic media and 
 computation are being infused into all processes of humanities 
 scholarship, inspiring remarkable transformations in scholarly 
 communication. 
  
 the trend toward greater connectivity suggests that researchers are using 
 computation increasingly in network environments.  connectivity is 
 important to scholarship because it erases the distance that separates 
 students from teachers and scholars from their colleagues, while allowing 
 users to access remote databases, share information in many different 
 media, connect to their working context wherever they are, and 
 collaborate in all phases of research. 
  
 the combination of the trend toward enduser computing and the trend 
 toward connectivity suggests that the scholarly use of electronic 
 resources, already evident among some researchers, will soon become an 
 established feature of scholarship.  the effects of these trends, along 
 with ongoing changes in scholarly practices, point to a future in which 
 humanities researchers will use computation and electronic communication 
 to help them formulate ideas, access sources, perform research, 
 collaborate with colleagues, seek peer review, publish and disseminate 
 results, and engage in many other professional and educational activities. 
  
 in summary, michelson emphasized four points  ) a portion of humanities 
 scholars already consider electronic texts the preferred format for 
 analysis and dissemination.  ) scholars are using these electronic 
 texts, in conjunction with other electronic resources, in all the 
 processes of scholarly communication.  ) the humanities scholars 
 working context is in the process of changing from print technology to 
 electronic technology, in many ways mirroring transformations that have 
 occurred or are occurring within the scientific community.  ) these 
 changes are occurring in conjunction with the development of a new 
 communication medium  research and education networks that are 
 characterized by their capacity to advance scholarship in a wholly unique 
 way. 
  
 michelson also reiterated her three principal arguments  l) electronic 
 texts are best understood in terms of the relationship to other 
 electronic resources and the growing prominence of networkmediated 
 scholarship.  ) the prospects for electronic texts lie in their capacity 
 to be integrated into the online network of electronic resources that 
 comprise the new working context for scholars.  ) retrospective conversion 
 of portions of the scholarly record should be a key strategy as information 
 providers respond to changes in scholarly communication practices. 
  
                                   
  
  
 veccia  ams evaluation project and public users of electronic resources 
  am and its design  site selection and evaluating the macintosh 
 implementation of am  characteristics of the six public libraries 
 selected  characteristics of ams users in these libraries  principal 
 ways am is being used  
  
  
 susan veccia, team leader, and joanne freeman, associate coordinator, 
 american memory, library of congress, gave a joint presentation.  first, 
 by way of introduction, veccia explained her and freemans roles in 
 american memory (am).  serving principally as an observer, veccia has 
 assisted with the evaluation project of am, placing am collections in a 
 variety of different sites around the country and helping to organize and 
 implement that project.  freeman has been an associate coordinator of am 
 and has been involved principally with the interpretative materials, 
 preparing some of the electronic exhibits and printed historical 
 information that accompanies am and that is requested by users.  veccia 
 and freeman shared anecdotal observations concerning am with public users 
 of electronic resources.  notwithstanding a fairly structured evaluation 
 in progress, both veccia and freeman chose not to report on specifics in 
 terms of numbers, etc., because they felt it was too early in the 
 evaluation project to do so. 
  
 am is an electronic archive of primary source materials from the library 
 of congress, selected collections representing a variety of formats 
 photographs, graphic arts, recorded sound, motion pictures, broadsides, 
 and soon, pamphlets and books.  in terms of the design of this system, 
 the interpretative exhibits have been kept separate from the primary 
 resources, with good reason.  accompanying this collection are printed 
 documentation and user guides, as well as guides that freeman prepared for 
 teachers so that they may begin using the content of the system at once. 
  
 veccia described the evaluation project before talking about the public 
 users of am, limiting her remarks to public libraries, because freeman 
 would talk more specifically about schools from kindergarten to twelfth 
 grade (k).   having started in spring , the evaluation currently 
 involves testing of the macintosh implementation of am.  since the 
 primary goal of this evaluation is to determine the most appropriate 
 audience or audiences for am, very different sites were selected.  this 
 makes evaluation difficult because of the varying degrees of technology 
 literacy among the sites.  am is situated in fortyfour locations, of 
 which six are public libraries and sixteen are schools.  represented 
 among the schools are elementary, junior high, and high schools. 
 district offices also are involved in the evaluation, which will 
 conclude in summer . 
  
 veccia focused the remainder of her talk on the six public libraries, one 
 of which doubles as a state library.  they represent a range of 
 geographic areas and a range of demographic characteristics.  for 
 example, three are located in urban settings, two in rural settings, and 
 one in a suburban setting.  a range of technical expertise is to be found 
 among these facilities as well.  for example, one is an apple library of 
 the future, while two others are rural oneroom librariesin one, am 
 sits at the front desk next to a tractor manual. 
  
 all public libraries have been extremely enthusiastic, supportive, and 
 appreciative of the work that am has been doing.  veccia characterized 
 various users  most users in public libraries describe themselves as 
 general readers of the students who use am in the public libraries, 
 those in fourth grade and above seem most interested.  public libraries 
 in rural sites tend to attract retired people, who have been highly 
 receptive to am.  users tend to fall into two additional categories  
 people interested in the content and historical connotations of these 
 primary resources, and those fascinated by the technology.  the format 
 receiving the most comments has been motion pictures.  the adult users in 
 public libraries are more comfortable with ibm computers, whereas young 
 people seem comfortable with either ibm or macintosh, although most of 
 them seem to come from a macintosh background.  this same tendency is 
 found in the schools. 
  
 what kinds of things do users do with am  in a public library there are 
 two main goals or ways that am is being used  as an individual learning 
 tool, and as a leisure activity.  adult learning was one area that veccia 
 would highlight as a possible application for a tool such as am.  she 
 described a patron of a rural public library who comes in every day on 
 his lunch hour and literally reads am, methodically going through the 
 collection image by image.  at the end of his hour he makes an electronic 
 bookmark, puts it in his pocket, and returns to work.  the next day he 
 comes in and resumes where he left off.  interestingly, this man had 
 never been in the library before he used am.  in another small, rural 
 library, the coordinator reports that am is a popular activity for some 
 of the older, retired people in the community, who ordinarily would not 
 use those things,computers.  another example of adult learning in 
 public libraries is book groups, one of which, in particular, is using am 
 as part of its reading on industrialization, integration, and urbanization 
 in the early s. 
  
 one library reports that a family is using am to help educate their 
 children.  in another instance, individuals from a local museum came in 
 to use am to prepare an exhibit on toys of the past.  these two examples 
 emphasize the mission of the public library as a cultural institution, 
 reaching out to people who do not have the same resources available to 
 those who live in a metropolitan area or have access to a major library.  
 one rural library reports that junior high school students in large 
 numbers came in one afternoon to use am for entertainment.  a number of 
 public libraries reported great interest among postcard collectors in the 
 detroit collection, which was essentially a collection of images used on 
 postcards around the turn of the century.  train buffs are similarly 
 interested because that was a time of great interest in railroading.  
 people, it was found, relate to things that they know of firsthand.  for 
 example, in both rural public libraries where am was made available, 
 observers reported that the older people with personal remembrances of 
 the turn of the century were gravitating to the detroit collection.  
 these examples served to underscore michelsons observation re the 
 integration of electronic tools and ideasthat people learn best when 
 the material relates to something they know. 
  
 veccia made the final point that in many cases am serves as a 
 publicrelations tool for the public libraries that are testing it.  in 
 one case, am is being used as a vehicle to secure additional funding for 
 the library.  in another case, am has served as an inspiration to the 
 staff of a major local public library in the south to think about ways to 
 make its own collection of photographs more accessible to the public. 
  
                                    
  
  
 freeman  am and archival electronic resources in a school environment  
 questions concerning context  questions concerning the electronic format 
 itself  computer anxiety  access and availability of the system  
 hardware  strengths gained through the use of archival resources in 
 schools  
  
  
 reiterating an observation made by veccia, that am is an archival 
 resource made up of primary materials with very little interpretation, 
 freeman stated that the project has attempted to bridge the gap between 
 these bare primary materials and a school environment, and in that cause 
 has created guided introductions to am collections.  loud demand from the 
 educational community,  chiefly from teachers working with the upper 
 grades of elementary school through high school, greeted the announcement 
 that am would be tested around the country. 
  
 freeman reported not only on what was learned about am in a school 
 environment, but also on several universal questions that were raised 
 concerning archival electronic resources in schools.  she discussed 
 several strengths of this type of material in a school environment as 
 opposed to a highly structured resource that offers a limited number of 
 paths to follow. 
  
 freeman first raised several questions about using am in a school 
 environment.  there is often some difficulty in developing a sense of 
 what the system contains.  many students sit down at a computer resource 
 and assume that, because am comes from the library of congress, all of 
 american history is now at their fingertips.  as a result of that sort of 
 mistaken judgment, some students are known to conclude that am contains 
 nothing of use to them when they look for one or two things and do not 
 find them.  it is difficult to discover that middle ground where one has 
 a sense of what the system contains.  some students grope toward the idea 
 of an archive, a new idea to them, since they have not previously 
 experienced what it means to have access to a vast body of somewhat 
 random information. 
  
 other questions raised by freeman concerned the electronic format itself.  
 for instance, in a school environment it is often difficult both for 
 teachers and students to gain a sense of what it is they are viewing.  
 they understand that it is a visual image, but they do not necessarily 
 know that it is a postcard from the turn of the century, a panoramic 
 photograph, or even machinereadable text of an eighteenthcentury 
 broadside, a twentiethcentury printed book, or a nineteenthcentury 
 diary.  that distinction is often difficult for people in a school 
 environment to grasp.  because of that, it occasionally becomes difficult 
 to draw conclusions from what one is viewing. 
  
 freeman also noted the obvious fear of the computer, which constitutes a 
 difficulty in using an electronic resource.  though students in general 
 did not suffer from this anxiety, several older students feared that they 
 were computerilliterate, an assumption that became selffulfilling when 
 they searched for something but failed to find it.  freeman said she 
 believed that some teachers also fear computer resources, because they 
 believe they lack complete control.  freeman related the example of 
 teachers shooing away students because it was not their time to use the 
 system.  this was a case in which the situation had to be extremely 
 structured so that the teachers would not feel that they had lost their 
 grasp on what the system contained. 
  
 a final question raised by freeman concerned access and availability of 
 the system.  she noted the occasional existence of a gap in communication 
 between school librarians and teachers.  often am sits in a school 
 library and the librarian is the person responsible for monitoring the 
 system.  teachers do not always take into their world new library 
 resources about which the librarian is excited.  indeed, at the sites 
 where am had been used most effectively within a library, the librarian 
 was required to go to specific teachers and instruct them in its use.  as 
 a result, several am sites will have inservice sessions over a summer, 
 in the hope that perhaps, with a more individualized link, teachers will 
 be more likely to use the resource. 
  
 a related issue in the school context concerned the number of 
 workstations available at any one location.  centralization of equipment 
 at the district level, with teachers invited to download things and walk 
 away with them, proved unsuccessful because the hours these offices were 
 open were also school hours. 
  
 another issue was hardware.  as veccia observed, a range of sites exists, 
 some technologically advanced and others essentially acquiring their 
 first computer for the primary purpose of using it in conjunction with 
 ams testing.  users at technologically sophisticated sites want even 
 more sophisticated hardware, so that they can perform even more 
 sophisticated tasks with the materials in am.  but once they acquire a 
 newer piece of hardware, they must learn how to use that also at an 
 unsophisticated site it takes an extremely long time simply to become 
 accustomed to the computer, not to mention the program offered with the 
 computer.  all of these small issues raise one large question, namely, 
 are systems like am truly rewarding in a school environment, or do they 
 simply act as innovative toys that do little more than spark interest 
  
 freeman contended that the evaluation project has revealed several strengths 
 that were gained through the use of archival resources in schools, including 
  
       psychic rewards from using am as a vast, rich database, with 
      teachers assigning various projects to studentsoral presentations, 
      written reports, a documentary, a turnofthecentury newspaper 
      projects that start with the materials in am but are completed using 
      other resources am thus is used as a research tool in conjunction 
      with other electronic resources, as well as with books and items in 
      the library where the system is set up. 
  
       students are acquiring computer literacy in a humanities context. 
  
       this sort of system is overcoming the isolation between disciplines 
      that often exists in schools.  for example, many english teachers are 
      requiring their students to write papers on historical topics 
      represented in am.  numerous teachers have reported that their 
      students are learning critical thinking skills using the system. 
  
       on a broader level, am is introducing primary materials, not only 
      to students but also to teachers, in an environment where often 
      simply none existan exciting thing for the students because it 
      helps them learn to conduct research, to interpret, and to draw 
      their own conclusions.  in learning to conduct research and what it 
      means, students are motivated to seek knowledge.  that relates to 
      another positive outcomea high level of personal involvement of 
      students with the materials in this system and greater motivation to 
      conduct their own research and draw their own conclusions. 
  
       perhaps the most ironic strength of these kinds of archival 
      electronic resources is that many of the teachers am interviewed 
      were desperate, it is no exaggeration to say, not only for primary 
      materials but for unstructured primary materials.  these would, they 
      thought, foster personally motivated research, exploration, and 
      excitement in their students.  indeed, these materials have done 
      just that.  ironically, however, this lack of structure produces 
      some of the confusion to which the newness of these kinds of 
      resources may also contribute.  the key to effective use of archival 
      products in a school environment is a clear, effective introduction 
      to the system and to what it contains.  
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  nothing known, quantitatively, about the number of 
 humanities scholars who must see the original versus those who would 
 settle for an edited transcript, or about the ways in which humanities 
 scholars are using information technology  firm conclusions concerning 
 the manner and extent of the use of supporting materials in print 
 provided by am to await completion of evaluative study  a listeners 
 reflections on additional applications of electronic texts  role of 
 electronic resources in teaching elementary research skills to students  
  
  
 during the discussion that followed the presentations by michelson, 
 veccia, and freeman, additional points emerged. 
  
 lesk asked if michelson could give any quantitative estimate of the 
 number of humanities scholars who must see or want to see the original, 
 or the best possible version of the material, versus those who typically 
 would settle for an edited transcript.  while unable to provide a figure, 
 she offered her impressions as an archivist who has done some reference 
 work and has discussed this issue with other archivists who perform 
 reference, that those who use archives and those who use primary sources 
 for what would be considered very highlevel scholarly research, as 
 opposed to, say, undergraduate papers, were few in number, especially 
 given the public interest in using primary sources to conduct 
 genealogical or avocational research and the kind of professional 
 research done by people in private industry or the federal government.  
 more important in michelsons view was that, quantitatively, nothing is 
 known about the ways in which, for example, humanities scholars are using 
 information technology.  no studies exist to offer guidance in creating 
 strategies.  the most recent study was conducted in  by the american 
 council of learned societies (acls), and what it showed was that  
 percent of humanities scholars at that time were using computers.  that 
 constitutes the extent of our knowledge. 
  
 concerning ams strategy for orienting people toward the scope of 
 electronic resources, freeman could offer no hard conclusions at this 
 point, because she and her colleagues were still waiting to see, 
 particularly in the schools, what has been made of their efforts.  within 
 the system, however, am has provided what are called electronic exhibits 
 such as introductions to time periods and materialsand these are 
 intended to offer a student user a sense of what a broadside is  and what 
 it might tell her or him.  but freeman conceded that the project staff 
 would have to talk with students next year, after teachers have had a 
 summer to use the materials, and attempt to discover what the students 
 were learning from the materials.  in addition, freeman described 
 supporting materials in print provided by am at the request of local 
 teachers during a meeting held at lc.  these included time lines, 
 bibliographies, and other materials that could be reproduced on a 
 photocopier in a classroom.  teachers could walk away with and use these, 
 and in this way gain a better understanding of the contents.  but again, 
 reaching firm conclusions concerning the manner and extent of their use 
 would have to wait until next year. 
  
 as to the changes she saw occurring at the national archives and records 
 administration (nara) as a result of the increasing emphasis on 
 technology in scholarly research, michelson stated that nara at this 
 point was absorbing the report by her and jeff rothenberg addressing 
 strategies for the archival profession in general, although not for the 
 national archives specifically.  nara is just beginning to establish its 
 role and what it can do.  in terms of changes and initiatives that nara 
 can take, no clear response could be given at this time. 
  
 greenfield remarked two trends mentioned in the session.  reflecting on 
 dalys opening comments on how he could have used a latin collection of 
 text in an electronic form, he said that at first he thought most scholars 
 would be unwilling to do that.  but as he thought of that in terms of the 
 original meaning of researchthat is, having already mastered these texts, 
 researching them for critical and comparative purposesfor the first time, 
 the electronic format made a lot of sense.  greenfield could envision 
 growing numbers of scholars learning the new technologies for that very 
 aspect of their scholarship and for conveniences sake. 
  
 listening to veccia and freeman, greenfield thought of an additional 
 application of electronic texts.  he realized that am could be used as a 
 guide to lead someone to original sources.  students cannot be expected 
 to have mastered these sources, things they have never known about 
 before.  thus, am is leading them, in theory, to a vast body of 
 information and giving them a superficial overview of it, enabling them 
 to select parts of it.  greenfield asked if any evidence exists that this 
 resource will indeed teach the new user, the k students, how to do 
 research.  scholars already know how to do research and are applying 
 these new tools.  but he wondered why students would go beyond picking 
 out things that were most exciting to them. 
  
 freeman conceded the correctness of greenfields observation as applied 
 to a school environment.  the risk is that a student would sit down at a 
 system, play with it, find some things of interest, and then walk away.  
 but in the relatively controlled situation of a school library, much will 
 depend on the instructions a teacher or a librarian gives a student.  she 
 viewed the situation not as one of finetuning research skills but of 
 involving students at a personal level in understanding and researching 
 things.  given the guidance one can receive at school, it then becomes 
 possible to teach elementary research skills to students, which in fact 
 one particular librarian said she was teaching her fifth graders.  
 freeman concluded that introducing the idea of following ones own path 
 of inquiry, which is essentially what research entails, involves more 
 than teaching specific skills.  to these comments veccia added the 
 observation that the individual teacher and the use of a creative 
 resource, rather than am itself, seemed to make the key difference. 
 some schools and some teachers are making excellent use of the nature 
 of critical thinking and teaching skills, she said. 
  
 concurring with these remarks, daly closed the session with the thought that 
 the more that producers produced for teachers and for scholars to use with 
 their students, the more successful their electronic products would prove. 
  
                                   
  
 session ii.  show and tell 
  
 jacqueline hess, director, national demonstration laboratory, served as 
 moderator of the showandtell session.  she noted that a 
 questionandanswer period would follow each presentation. 
  
  
 mylonas  overview and content of perseus  perseus primary materials 
 exist in a systemindependent, archival form  a concession  textual 
 aspects of perseus  tools to use with the greek text  prepared indices 
 and fulltext searches in perseus  englishgreek word search leads to 
 close study of words and concepts  navigating perseus by tracing down 
 indices  using the iconography to perform research  
  
  
 elli mylonas, managing editor, perseus project, harvard university, first 
 gave an overview of perseus, a large, collaborative effort based at 
 harvard university but with contributors and collaborators located at 
 numerous universities and colleges in the united states (e.g., bowdoin, 
 maryland, pomona, chicago, virginia).  funded primarily by the 
 annenbergcpb project, with additional funding from apple, harvard, and 
 the packard humanities institute, among others, perseus is a multimedia, 
 hypertextual database for teaching and research on classical greek 
 civilization, which was released in february  in version . and 
 distributed by yale university press. 
  
 consisting entirely of primary materials, perseus includes ancient greek 
 texts and translations of those texts catalog entriesthat is, museum 
 catalog entries, not library catalog entrieson vases, sites, coins, 
 sculpture, and archaeological objects maps and a dictionary, among 
 other sources.  the number of objects and the objects for which catalog 
 entries exist are accompanied by thousands of color images, which 
 constitute a major feature of the database.  perseus contains 
 approximately  megabytes of text, an amount that will double in 
 subsequent versions.  in addition to these primary materials, the perseus 
 project has been building tools for using them, making access and 
 navigation easier, the goal being to build part of the electronic 
 environment discussed earlier in the morning in which students or 
 scholars can work with their sources. 
  
 the demonstration of perseus will show only a fraction of the real work 
 that has gone into it, because the project had to face the dilemma of 
 what to enter when putting something into machinereadable form  should 
 one aim for very high quality or make concessions in order to get the 
 material in  since perseus decided to opt for very high quality, all of 
 its primary materials exist in a systemindependentinsofar as it is 
 possible to be systemindependentarchival form.  deciding what that 
 archival form would be and attaining it required much work and thought.  
 for example, all the texts are marked up in sgml, which will be made 
 compatible with the guidelines of the text encoding initiative (tei) when 
 they are issued. 
  
 drawings are postscript files, not meeting international standards, but 
 at least designed to go across platforms.  images, or rather the real 
 archival forms, consist of the best available slides, which are being 
 digitized.  much of the catalog material exists in database forma form 
 that the average user could use, manipulate, and display on a personal 
 computer, but only at great cost.  thus, this is where the concession 
 comes in  all of this rich, wellmarkedup information is stripped of 
 much of its content the images are converted into bitmaps and the text 
 into small formatted chunks.  all this information can then be imported 
 into hypercard and run on a midrange macintosh, which is what perseus 
 users have.  this fact has made it possible for perseus to attain wide 
 use fairly rapidly.  without those archival forms the hypercard version 
 being demonstrated could not be made easily, and the project could not 
 have the potential to move to other forms and machines and software as 
 they appear, none of which information is in perseus on the cd. 
  
 of the numerous multimedia aspects of perseus, mylonas focused on the 
 textual.  part of what makes perseus such a pleasure to use, mylonas 
 said, is this effort at seamless integration and the ability to move 
 around both visual and textual material.  perseus also made the decision 
 not to attempt to interpret its material any more than one interprets by 
 selecting.  but, mylonas emphasized, perseus is not courseware  no 
 syllabus exists.  there is no effort to define how one teaches a topic 
 using perseus, although the project may eventually collect papers by 
 people who have used it to teach.  rather, perseus aims to provide 
 primary material in a kind of electronic library, an electronic sandbox, 
 so to say, in which students and scholars who are working on this 
 material can explore by themselves.  with that, mylonas demonstrated 
 perseus, beginning with the perseus gateway, the first thing one sees 
 upon opening perseusan effort in part to solve the contextualizing 
 problemwhich tells the user what the system contains. 
  
 mylonas demonstrated only a very small portion, beginning with primary 
 texts and running off the cdrom.  having selected aeschylus prometheus 
 bound, which was viewable in greek and english pretty much in the same 
 segments together, mylonas demonstrated tools to use with the greek text, 
 something not possible with a book  looking up the dictionary entry form 
 of an unfamiliar word in greek after subjecting it to perseus 
 morphological analysis for all the texts.  after finding out about a 
 word, a user may then decide to see if it is used anywhere else in greek.  
 because vast amounts of indexing support all of the primary material, one 
 can find out where else all forms of a particular greek word appear 
 often not a trivial matter because greek is highly inflected.  further, 
 since the story of prometheus has to do with the origins of sacrifice, a 
 user may wish to study and explore sacrifice in greek literature by 
 typing sacrifice into a small window, a user goes to the englishgreek 
 word listsomething one cannot do without the computer (perseus has 
 indexed the definitions of its dictionary)the string sacrifice appears 
 in the definitions of these sixtyfive words.  one may then find out 
 where any of those words is used in the work(s) of a particular author.  
 the english definitions are not lemmatized. 
  
 all of the indices driving this kind of usage were originally devised for 
 speed, mylonas observed in other words, all that kind of information 
 all forms of all words, where they exist, the dictionary form they belong 
 towere collected into databases, which will expedite searching.  then 
 it was discovered that one can do things searching in these databases 
 that could not be done searching in the full texts.  thus, although there 
 are fulltext searches in perseus, much of the work is done behind the 
 scenes, using prepared indices.  re the indexing that is done behind the 
 scenes, mylonas pointed out that without the sgml forms of the text, it 
 could not be done effectively.  much of this indexing is based on the 
 structures that are made explicit by the sgml tagging. 
  
 it was found that one of the things many of perseus nongreekreading 
 users do is start from the dictionary and then move into the close study 
 of words and concepts via this kind of englishgreek word search, by which 
 means they might select a concept.  this exercise has been assigned to 
 students in core courses at harvardto study a concept by looking for the 
 english word in the dictionary, finding the greek words, and then finding 
 the words in the greek but, of course, reading across in the english. 
 that tells them a great deal about what a translation means as well. 
  
 should one also wish to see images that have to do with sacrifice, that 
 person would go to the object key word search, which allows one to 
 perform a similar kind of index retrieval on the database of 
 archaeological objects.  without words, pictures are useless perseus has 
 not reached the point where it can do much with images that are not 
 cataloged.  thus, although it is possible in perseus with text and images 
 to navigate by knowing where one wants to end upfor example, a 
 redfigure vase from the boston museum of fine artsone can perform this 
 kind of navigation very easily by tracing down indices.  mylonas 
 illustrated several generic scenes of sacrifice on vases.  the features 
 demonstrated derived from perseus . version . will implement even 
 better means of retrieval. 
  
 mylonas closed by looking at one of the pictures and noting again that 
 one can do a great deal of research using the iconography as well as the 
 texts.  for instance, students in a core course at harvard this year were 
 highly interested in greek concepts of foreigners and representations of 
 nongreeks.  so they performed a great deal of research, both with texts 
 (e.g., herodotus) and with iconography on vases and coins, on how the 
 greeks portrayed nongreeks.  at the same time, art historians who study 
 iconography were also interested, and were able to use this material. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  indexing and searchability of all english words in perseus  
 several features of perseus .  several levels of customization 
 possible  perseus used for general education  perseus effects on 
 education  contextual information in perseus  main challenge and 
 emphasis of perseus  
  
  
 several points emerged in the discussion that followed mylonass presentation. 
  
 although mylonas had not demonstrated perseus ability to crosssearch 
 documents, she confirmed that all english words in perseus are indexed 
 and can be searched.  so, for example, sacrifice could have been searched 
 in all texts, the historical essay, and all the catalogue entries with 
 their descriptionsin short, in all of perseus. 
  
 boolean logic is not in perseus . but will be added to the next 
 version, although an effort is being made not to restrict perseus to a 
 database in which one just performs searching, boolean or otherwise.  it 
 is possible to move laterally through the documents by selecting a word 
 one is interested in and selecting an area of information one is 
 interested in and trying to look that word up in that area. 
  
 since perseus was developed in hypercard, several levels of customization 
 are possible.  simple authoring tools exist that allow one to create 
 annotated paths through the information, which are useful for notetaking 
 and for guided tours for teaching purposes and for expository writing.  
 with a little more ingenuity it is possible to begin to add or substitute 
 material in perseus. 
  
 perseus has not been used so much for classics education as for general 
 education, where it seemed to have an impact on the students in the core 
 course at harvard (a general required course that students must take in 
 certain areas).  students were able to use primary material much more. 
  
 the perseus project has an evaluation team at the university of maryland 
 that has been documenting perseus effects on education.  perseus is very 
 popular, and anecdotal evidence indicates that it is having an effect at 
 places other than harvard, for example, test sites at ball state 
 university, drury college, and numerous small places where opportunities 
 to use vast amounts of primary data may not exist.  one documented effect 
 is that archaeological, anthropological, and philological research is 
 being done by the same person instead of by three different people. 
  
 the contextual information in perseus includes an overview essay, a 
 fairly linear historical essay on the fifth century b.c. that provides 
 links into the primary material (e.g., herodotus, thucydides, and 
 plutarch), via small gray underscoring (on the screen) of linked 
 passages.  these are handmade links into other material. 
  
 to different extents, most of the production work was done at harvard, 
 where the people and the equipment are located.  much of the 
 collaborative activity involved data collection and structuring, because 
 the main challenge and the emphasis of perseus is the gathering of 
 primary material, that is, building a useful environment for studying 
 classical greece, collecting data, and making it useful.  
 systemsbuilding is definitely not the main concern.  thus, much of the 
 work has involved writing essays, collecting information, rewriting it, 
 and tagging it.  that can be done off site.  the creative link for the 
 overview essay as well as for both systems and data was collaborative, 
 and was forged via email and paper mail with professors at pomona and 
 bowdoin. 
  
                                   
  
  
 calaluca  plds principal focus and contribution to scholarship  
 various questions preparatory to beginning the project  basis for 
 project  basic rule in converting pld  concerning the images in pld  
 running pld under a variety of retrieval softwares  encoding the 
 database a hardfought issue  various features demonstrated  importance 
 of user documentation  limitations of the cdrom version     
  
  
 eric calaluca, vice president, chadwyckhealey, inc., demonstrated a 
 software interpretation of the patrologia latina database (pld).  plds 
 principal focus from the beginning of the project about threeandahalf 
 years ago was on converting mignes latin series, and in the end, 
 calaluca suggested, conversion of the text will be the major contribution 
 to scholarship.  calaluca stressed that, as possibly the only private 
 publishing organization at the workshop, chadwyckhealey had sought no 
 federal funds or national foundation support before embarking upon the 
 project, but instead had relied upon a great deal of homework and 
 marketing to accomplish the task of conversion. 
  
 ever since the possibilities of computersearching have emerged, scholars 
 in the field of late ancient and early medieval studies (philosophers, 
 theologians, classicists, and those studying the history of natural law 
 and the history of the legal development of western civilization) have 
 been longing for a fully searchable version of western literature, for 
 example, all the texts of augustine and bernard of clairvaux and 
 boethius, not to mention all the secondary and tertiary authors. 
  
 various questions arose, calaluca said.  should one convert migne  
 should the database be encoded  is it necessary to do that  how should 
 it be delivered  what about cdrom  since this is a transitional 
 medium, why even bother to create software to run on a cdrom  since 
 everybody knows people will be networking information, why go to the 
 troublewhich is far greater with cdrom than with the production of 
 magnetic data  finally, how does one make the data available  can many 
 of the hurdles to using electronic information that some publishers have 
 imposed upon databases be eliminated 
  
 the pld project was based on the principle that computersearching of 
 texts is most effective when it is done with a large database.  because 
 pld represented a collection that serves so many disciplines across so 
 many periods, it was irresistible. 
  
 the basic rule in converting pld was to do no harm, to avoid the sins of 
 intrusion in such a database  no introduction of newer editions, no 
 onthespot changes, no eradicating of all possible falsehoods from an 
 edition.  thus, pld is not the final act in electronic publishing for 
 this discipline, but simply the beginning.  the conversion of pld has 
 evoked numerous unanticipated questions  how will information be used  
 what about networking  can the rights of a database be protected  
 should one protect the rights of a database  how can it be made 
 available 
  
 those converting pld also tried to avoid the sins of omission, that is, 
 excluding portions of the collections or whole sections.  what about the 
 images  pld is full of images, some are extremely pious 
 nineteenthcentury representations of the fathers, while others contain 
 highly interesting elements.  the goal was to cover all the text of migne 
 (including notes, in greek and in hebrew, the latter of which, in 
 particular, causes problems in creating a search structure), all the 
 indices, and even the images, which are being scanned in separately 
 searchable files. 
  
 several north american institutions that have placed acquisition requests 
 for the pld database have requested it in magnetic form without software, 
 which means they are already running it without software, without 
 anything demonstrated at the workshop. 
  
 what cannot practically be done is go back and reconvert and reencode 
 data, a timeconsuming and extremely costly enterprise.  calaluca sees 
 pld as a database that can, and should, be run under a variety of 
 retrieval softwares.  this will permit the widest possible searches.  
 consequently, the need to produce a cdrom of pld, as well as to develop 
 software that could handle some . gigabyte of heavily encoded text, 
 developed out of conversations with collection development and reference 
 librarians who wanted software both compassionate enough for the 
 pedestrian but also capable of incorporating the most detailed 
 lexicographical studies that a user desires to conduct.  in the end, the 
 encoding and conversion of the data will prove the most enduring 
 testament to the value of the project. 
  
 the encoding of the database was also a hardfought issue  did the 
 database need to be encoded were there normative structures for encoding 
 humanist texts  should it be sgml  what about the teiwill it last, 
 will it prove useful  calaluca expressed some minor doubts as to whether 
 a data bank can be fully teiconformant.  every effort can be made, but 
 in the end to be teiconformant means to accept the need to make some 
 firm encoding decisions that can, indeed, be disputed.  the tei points 
 the publisher in a proper direction but does not presume to make all the 
 decisions for him or her.  essentially, the goal of encoding was to 
 eliminate, as much as possible, the hindrances to informationnetworking, 
 so that if an institution acquires a database, everybody associated with 
 the institution can have access to it. 
  
 calaluca demonstrated a portion of volume , because it had the most 
 anomalies in it.  the software was created by electronic book 
 technologies of providence, ri, and is called dynatext.  the software 
 works only with sgmlcoded data. 
  
 viewing a table of contents on the screen, the audience saw how dynatext 
 treats each element as a book and attempts to simplify movement through a 
 volume.  familiarity with the patrologia in print (i.e., the text, its 
 source, and the editions) will make the machinereadable versions highly 
 useful.  (software with a windows application was sought for pld, 
 calaluca said, because this was the main trend for scholarly use.) 
  
 calaluca also demonstrated how a user can perform a variety of searches 
 and quickly move to any part of a volume the lookup screen provides 
 some basic, simple wordsearching.  
  
 calaluca argued that one of the major difficulties is not the software.  
 rather, in creating a product that will be used by scholars representing 
 a broad spectrum of computer sophistication,  user documentation proves 
 to be the most important service one can provide. 
  
 calaluca next illustrated a truncated search under mysterium within ten 
 words of virtus and how one would be able to find its contents throughout 
 the entire database.  he said that the exciting thing about pld is that 
 many of the applications in the retrieval software being written for it 
 will exceed the capabilities of the software employed now for the cdrom 
 version.  the cdrom faces genuine limitations, in terms of speed and 
 comprehensiveness, in the creation of a retrieval software to run it.  
 calaluca said he hoped that individual scholars will download the data, 
 if they wish, to their personal computers, and have ready access to 
 important texts on a constant basis, which they will be able to use in 
 their research and from which they might even be able to publish. 
  
 (calaluca explained that the blue numbers represented mignes column numbers, 
 which are the standard scholarly references.  pulling up a note, he stated 
 that these texts were heavily edited and the image files would appear simply 
 as a note as well, so that one could quickly access an image.) 
  
                                   
  
  
 fleischhauererway  several problems with which am is still wrestling  
 various search and retrieval capabilities  illustration of automatic 
 stemming and a truncated search  ams attempt to find ways to connect 
 cataloging to the texts  ams gravitation towards sgml  striking a 
 balance between quantity and quality  how am furnishes users recourse to 
 images  conducting a search in a fulltext environment  macintosh and 
 ibm prototypes of am  multimedia aspects of am  
  
  
 a demonstration of american memory by its coordinator, carl fleischhauer, 
 and ricky erway, associate coordinator, library of congress, concluded 
 the morning session.  beginning with a collection of broadsides from the 
 continental congress and the constitutional convention, the only text 
 collection in a presentable form at the time of the workshop, fleischhauer 
 highlighted several of the problems with which am is still wrestling. 
 (in its final form, the disk will contain two collections, not only the 
 broadsides but also the full text with illustrations of a set of 
 approximately  africanamerican pamphlets from the period  to .) 
  
 as freeman had explained earlier, am has attempted to use a small amount 
 of interpretation to introduce collections.  in the present case, the 
 contractor, a company named quick source, in silver spring, md., used 
 software called toolbook and put together a modestly interactive 
 introduction to the collection.  like the two preceding speakers, 
 fleischhauer argued that the real asset was the underlying collection. 
  
 fleischhauer proceeded to describe various search and retrieval 
 capabilities while erway worked the computer.  in this particular package 
 the go to pulldown allowed the user in effect to jump out of toolbook, 
 where the interactive program was located, and enter the thirdparty 
 software used by am for this text collection, which is called personal 
 librarian.  this was the windows version of personal librarian, a 
 software application put together by a company in rockville, md. 
  
 since the broadsides came from the revolutionary war period, a search was 
 conducted using the words british or war, with the default operator reset 
 as or.  fleischhauer demonstrated both automatic stemming (which finds 
 other forms of the same root) and a truncated search.  one of personal 
 librarians strongest features, the relevance ranking, was represented by 
 a chart that indicated how often words being sought appeared in 
 documents, with the one receiving the most hits obtaining the highest 
 score.  the hit list that is supplied takes the relevance ranking into 
 account, making the first hit, in effect, the one the software has 
 selected as the most relevant example. 
  
 while in the text of one of the broadside documents, fleischhauer 
 remarked ams attempt to find ways to connect cataloging to the texts, 
 which it does in different ways in different manifestations.  in the case 
 shown, the cataloging was pasted on  am took marc records that were 
 written as online records right into one of the librarys mainframe 
 retrieval programs, pulled them out, and handed them off to the contractor, 
 who massaged them somewhat to display them in the manner shown.  one of 
 ams questions is, does the cataloguing normally performed in the mainframe 
 work in this context, or had am ought to think through adjustments 
  
 fleischhauer made the additional point that, as far as the text goes, am 
 has gravitated towards sgml (he pointed to the boldface in the upper part 
 of the screen).  although extremely limited in its ability to translate 
 or interpret sgml, personal librarian will furnish both bold and italics 
 on screen a fairly easy thing to do, but it is one of the ways in which 
 sgml is useful. 
  
 striking a balance between quantity and quality has been a major concern 
 of am, with accuracy being one of the places where project staff have 
 felt that less than percent accuracy was not unacceptable.  
 fleischhauer cited the example of the standard of the rekeying industry, 
 namely . percent as one service bureau informed him, to go from 
 . to  percent would double the cost. 
  
 fleischhauer next demonstrated how am furnishes users recourse to images, 
 and at the same time recalled lesks pointed question concerning the 
 number of people who would look at those images and the number who would 
 work only with the text.  if the implication of lesks question was 
 sound, fleischhauer said, it raised the stakes for text accuracy and 
 reduced the value of the strategy for images. 
  
 contending that preservation is always a bugaboo, fleischhauer 
 demonstrated several images derived from a scan of a preservation 
 microfilm that am had made.  he awarded a grade of c at best, perhaps a 
 c minus or a c plus, for how well it worked out.  indeed, the matter of 
 learning if other people had better ideas about scanning in general, and, 
 in particular, scanning from microfilm, was one of the factors that drove 
 am to attempt to think through the agenda for the workshop.  skew, for 
 example, was one of the issues that am in its ignorance had not reckoned 
 would prove so difficult. 
  
 further, the handling of images of the sort shown, in a desktop computer 
 environment, involved a considerable amount of zooming and scrolling.  
 ultimately, am staff feel that perhaps the paper copy that is printed out 
 might be the most useful one, but they remain uncertain as to how much 
 onscreen reading users will do. 
  
 returning to the text, fleischhauer asked viewers to imagine a person who 
 might be conducting a search in a fulltext environment.  with this 
 scenario, he proceeded to illustrate other features of personal librarian 
 that he considered helpful for example, it provides the ability to 
 notice words as one reads.  clicking the include button on the bottom 
 of the search window pops the words that have been highlighted into the 
 search.  thus, a user can refine the search as he or she reads, 
 reexecuting the search and continuing to find things in the quest for 
 materials.  this software not only contains relevance ranking, boolean 
 operators, and truncation, it also permits one to perform word algebra, 
 so to say, where one puts two or three words in parentheses and links 
 them with one boolean operator and then a couple of words in another set 
 of parentheses and asks for things within so many words of others. 
  
 until they became acquainted recently with some of the work being done in 
 classics, the am staff had not realized that a large number of the 
 projects that involve electronic texts were being done by people with a 
 profound interest in language and linguistics.  their search strategies 
 and thinking are oriented to those fields, as is shown in particular by 
 the perseus example.  as amateur historians, the am staff were thinking 
 more of searching for concepts and ideas than for particular words.  
 obviously, fleischhauer conceded, searching for concepts and ideas and 
 searching for words may be two rather closely related things. 
  
 while displaying several images, fleischhauer observed that the macintosh 
 prototype built by am contains a greater diversity of formats.  echoing a 
 previous speaker, he said that it was easier to stitch things together in 
 the macintosh, though it tended to be a little more anemic in search and 
 retrieval.  am, therefore, increasingly has been investigating 
 sophisticated retrieval engines in the ibm format. 
  
 fleischhauer demonstrated several additional examples of the prototype 
 interfaces  one was ams metaphor for the network future, in which a 
 kind of readingroom graphic suggests how one would be able to go around 
 to different materials.  am contains a large number of photographs in 
 analog video form worked up from a videodisc, which enable users to make 
 copies to print or incorporate in digital documents.  a framegrabber is 
 built into the system, making it possible to bring an image into a window 
 and digitize or print it out. 
  
 fleischhauer next demonstrated sound recording, which included texts.  
 recycled from a previous project, the collection included sixty rpm 
 phonograph records of political speeches that were made during and 
 immediately after world war i.  these constituted approximately three 
 hours of audio, as am has digitized it, which occupy  megabytes on a 
 cd.  thus, they are considerably compressed.  from the catalogue card, 
 fleischhauer proceeded to a transcript of a speech with the audio 
 available and with highlighted text following it as it played. 
 a photograph has been added and a transcription made. 
  
 considerable value has been added beyond what the library of congress 
 normally would do in cataloguing a sound recording, which raises several 
 questions for am concerning where to draw lines about how much value it can 
 afford to add and at what point, perhaps, this becomes more than am could 
 reasonably do or reasonably wish to do.  fleischhauer also demonstrated 
 a motion picture.  as freeman had reported earlier, the motion picture 
 materials have proved the most popular, not surprisingly.  this says more 
 about the medium, he thought, than about ams presentation of it. 
  
 because ams goal was to bring together things that could be used by 
 historians or by people who were curious about history, 
 turnofthecentury footage seemed to represent the most appropriate 
 collections from the library of congress in motion pictures. these were 
 the very first films made by thomas edisons company and some others at 
 that time.  the particular example illustrated was a biograph film, 
 brought in with a framegrabber into a window.  a single videodisc 
 contains about fifty titles and pieces of film from that period, all of 
 new york city.  taken together, am believes, they provide an interesting 
 documentary resource. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  using the framegrabber in am  volume of material processed 
 and to be processed  purpose of am within lc  cataloguing and the 
 nature of ams material  sgml coding and the question of quality versus 
 quantity  
  
  
 during the questionandanswer period that followed fleischhauers 
 presentation, several clarifications were made. 
  
 am is bringing in motion pictures from a videodisc.  the framegrabber 
 devices create a window on a computer screen, which permits users to 
 digitize a single frame of the movie or one of the photographs.  it 
 produces a crude, roughandready image that high school students can 
 incorporate into papers, and that has worked very nicely in this way. 
  
 commenting on fleischhauers assertion that am was looking more at 
 searching ideas than words, mylonas argued that without words an idea 
 does not exist.  fleischhauer conceded that he ought to have articulated 
 his point more clearly.  mylonas stated that they were in fact both 
 talking about the same thing.  by searching for words and by forcing 
 people to focus on the word, the perseus project felt that they would get 
 them to the idea.  the way one reviews results is tailored more to one 
 kind of user than another. 
  
 concerning the total volume of material that has been processed in this 
 way, am at this point has in retrievable form seven or eight collections, 
 all of them photographic.  in the macintosh environment, for example, 
 there probably are ,, photographs.  the sound recordings 
 number sixty items.  the broadsides number about  items.  there are 
  political cartoons in the form of drawings.  the motion pictures, as 
 individual items, number sixty to seventy. 
  
 am also has a manuscript collection, the life history portion of one of 
 the federal project series, which will contain , individual 
 documents, all firstperson narratives.  am has in process about  
 africanamerican pamphlets, or about , printed pages for the period 
 .  also in the works are some , panoramic photographs.  am 
 has recycled a fair amount of the work done by lcs prints and 
 photographs division during the librarys optical disk pilot project in 
 the s.  for example, a special division of lc has tooled up and 
 thought through all the ramifications of electronic presentation of 
 photographs.  indeed, they are wheeling them out in great barrel loads.  
 the purpose of am within the library, it is hoped, is to catalyze several 
 of the other special collection divisions which have no particular 
 experience with, in some cases, mixed feelings about, an activity such as 
 am.  moreover, in many cases the divisions may be characterized as not 
 only lacking experience in electronifying things but also in automated 
 cataloguing.  marc cataloguing as practiced in the united states is 
 heavily weighted toward the description of monograph and serial 
 materials, but is much thinner when one enters the world of manuscripts 
 and things that are held in the librarys music collection and other 
 units.  in response to a comment by lesk, that ams material is very 
 heavily photographic, and is so primarily because individual records have 
 been made for each photograph, fleischhauer observed that an itemlevel 
 catalog record exists, for example, for each photograph in the detroit 
 publishing collection of , pictures.  in the case of the federal 
 writers project, for which nearly , documents exist, representing 
 information from twentysix different states, am with the assistance of 
 karen stuart of the manuscript division will attempt to find some way not 
 only to have a collectionlevel record but perhaps a marc record for each 
 state, which will then serve as an umbrella for the  documents 
 that come under it.  but that drama remains to be enacted.  the am staff 
 is conservative and clings to cataloguing, though of course visitors tout 
 artificial intelligence and neural networks in a manner that suggests that 
 perhaps one need not have cataloguing or that much of it could be put aside. 
  
 the matter of sgml coding, fleischhauer conceded, returned the discussion 
 to the earlier treated question of quality versus quantity in the library 
 of congress.  of course, text conversion can be done with percent 
 accuracy, but it means that when ones holdings are as vast as lcs only 
 a tiny amount will be exposed, whereas permitting lower levels of 
 accuracy can lead to exposing or sharing larger amounts, but with the 
 quality correspondingly impaired. 
  
                                   
  
  
 twohig  a contrary experience concerning electronic options  volume of 
 material in the washington papers and a suggestion of david packard  
 implications of packards suggestion  transcribing the documents for the 
 cdrom  accuracy of transcriptions  the cdrom edition of the founding 
 fathers documents  
  
  
 finding encouragement in a comment of michelsons from the morning 
 sessionthat numerous people in the humanities were choosing electronic 
 options to do their workdorothy twohig, editor, the papers of george 
 washington, opened her illustrated talk by noting that her experience 
 with literary scholars and numerous people in editing was contrary to 
 michelsons.  twohig emphasized literary scholars complete ignorance of 
 the technological options available to them or their reluctance or, in 
 some cases, their downright hostility toward these options. 
  
 after providing an overview of the five founding fathers projects 
 (jefferson at princeton, franklin at yale, john adams at the 
 massachusetts historical society, and madison down the hall from her at 
 the university of virginia), twohig observed that the washington papers, 
 like all of the projects, include both sides of the washington 
 correspondence and deal with some , documents to be published with 
 extensive annotation in eighty to eightyfive volumes, a project that 
 will not be completed until well into the next century.  thus, it was 
 with considerable enthusiasm several years ago that the washington papers 
 project (wpp) greeted david packards suggestion that the papers of the 
 founding fathers could be published easily and inexpensively, and to the 
 great benefit of american scholarship, via cdrom. 
  
 in pragmatic terms, funding from the packard foundation would expedite 
 the transcription of thousands of documents waiting to be put on disk in 
 the wpp offices.  further, since the costs of collecting, editing, and 
 converting the founding fathers documents into letterpress editions were 
 running into the millions of dollars, and the considerable staffs 
 involved in all of these projects were devoting their careers to 
 producing the work, the packard foundations suggestion had a 
 revolutionary aspect  transcriptions of the entire corpus of the 
 founding fathers papers would be available on cdrom to public and 
 college libraries, even high schools, at a fraction of the cost 
  for the annual license feeto produce a limited university 
 press run of , of each volume of the published papers at  per 
 printed volume.  given the current budget crunch in educational systems 
 and the corresponding constraints on librarians in smaller institutions 
 who wish to add these volumes to their collections, producing the 
 documents on cdrom would likely open a greatly expanded audience for the 
 papers.  twohig stressed, however, that development of the founding 
 fathers cdrom is still in its infancy.  serious software problems remain 
 to be resolved before the material can be put into readable form.   
  
 funding from the packard foundation resulted in a major push to 
 transcribe the , or so documents of the washington papers remaining 
 to be transcribed onto computer disks.  slides illustrated several of the 
 problems encountered, for example, the present inability of cdrom to 
 indicate the crossouts (deleted material) in eighteenth century 
 documents.  twohig next described documents from various periods in the 
 eighteenth century that have been transcribed in chronological order and 
 delivered to the packard offices in california, where they are converted 
 to the cdrom, a process that is expected to consume five years to 
 complete (that is, reckoning from david packards suggestion made several 
 years ago, until about july ).  twohig found an encouraging 
 indication of the projects benefits in the ongoing use made by scholars 
 of the search functions of the cdrom, particularly in reducing the time 
 spent in manually turning the pages of the washington papers. 
  
 twohig next furnished details concerning the accuracy of transcriptions.  
 for instance, the insertion of thousands of documents on the cdrom 
 currently does not permit each document to be verified against the 
 original manuscript several times as in the case of documents that appear 
 in the published edition.  however, the transcriptions receive a cursory 
 check for obvious typos, the misspellings of proper names, and other 
 errors from the wpp cdrom editor.  eventually, all documents that appear 
 in the electronic version will be checked by project editors.  although 
 this process has met with opposition from some of the editors on the 
 grounds that imperfect work may leave their offices, the advantages in 
 making this material available as a research tool outweigh  fears about the 
 misspelling of proper names and other relatively minor editorial matters. 
  
 completion of all five founding fathers projects (i.e., retrievability 
 and searchability of all of the documents by proper names, alternate 
 spellings, or varieties of subjects) will provide one of the richest 
 sources of this size for the history of the united states in the latter 
 part of the eighteenth century.  further, publication on cdrom will 
 allow editors to include even minutiae, such as laundry lists, not 
 included in the printed volumes. 
  
 it seems possible that the extensive annotation provided in the printed 
 volumes eventually will be added to the cdrom edition, pending 
 negotiations with the publishers of the papers.  at the moment, the 
 founding fathers cdrom is accessible only on the ibycus, a computer 
 developed out of the thesaurus linguae graecae project and designed for 
 the use of classical scholars.  there are perhaps  ibycus computers in 
 the country, most of which are in university classics departments.  
 ultimately, it is anticipated that the cdrom edition of the founding 
 fathers documents will run on any ibmcompatible or macintosh computer 
 with a cdrom drive.  numerous changes in the software will also occur 
 before the project is completed.  (editors note an ibycus was 
 unavailable to demonstrate the cdrom.) 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  several additional features of wpp clarified  
  
  
 discussion following twohigs presentation served to clarify several 
 additional features, including () that the projects primary 
 intellectual product consists in the electronic transcription of the 
 material () that the text transmitted to the cdrom people is not 
 marked up () that cataloging and subjectindexing of the material 
 remain to be worked out (though at this point material can be retrieved 
 by name) and () that because all the searching is done in the hardware, 
 the ibycus is designed to read a cdrom which contains only sequential 
 text files.  technically, it then becomes very easy to read the material 
 off and put it on another device. 
  
                                   
  
  
 lebron  overview of the history of the joint project between aaas and 
 oclc  several practices the online environment shares with traditional 
 publishing on hard copy  several technical and behavioral barriers to 
 electronic publishing  how aaas and oclc arrived at the subject of 
 clinical trials  advantages of the electronic format and other features 
 of ojcct  an illustrated tour of the journal  
  
  
 maria lebron, managing editor, the online journal of current clinical 
 trials (ojcct), presented an illustrated overview of the history of the 
 joint project between the american association for the advancement of 
 science (aaas) and the online computer library center, inc. (oclc).  the 
 joint venture between aaas and oclc owes its beginning to a 
 reorganization launched by the new chief executive officer at oclc about 
 three years ago and combines the strengths of these two disparate 
 organizations.  in short, ojcct represents the process of scholarly 
 publishing on line. 
  
 lebron next discussed several practices the online environment shares 
 with traditional publishing on hard copyfor example, peer review of 
 manuscriptsthat are highly important in the academic world.  lebron 
 noted in particular the implications of citation counts for tenure 
 committees and grants committees.  in the traditional hardcopy 
 environment, citation counts are readily demonstrable, whereas the 
 online environment represents an ethereal medium to most academics. 
  
 lebron remarked several technical and behavioral barriers to electronic 
 publishing, for instance, the problems in transmission created by special 
 characters or by complex graphics and halftones.  in addition, she noted 
 economic limitations such as the storage costs of maintaining back issues 
 and market or audience education. 
  
 manuscripts cannot be uploaded to ojcct, lebron explained, because it is 
 not a bulletin board or email, forms of electronic transmission of 
 information that have created an ambience clouding peoples understanding 
 of what the journal is attempting to do.  ojcct, which publishes 
 peerreviewed medical articles dealing with the subject of clinical 
 trials, includes text, tabular material, and graphics, although at this 
 time it can transmit only line illustrations. 
  
 next, lebron described how aaas and oclc arrived at the subject of 
 clinical trials  it is ) a highly statistical discipline that ) does 
 not require halftones but can satisfy the needs of its audience with line 
 illustrations and graphic material, and ) there is a need for the speedy 
 dissemination of highquality research results.  clinical trials are 
 research activities that involve the administration of a test treatment 
 to some experimental unit in order to test its usefulness before it is 
 made available to the general population.  lebron proceeded to give 
 additional information on ojcct concerning its editorinchief, editorial 
 board, editorial content, and the types of articles it publishes 
 (including peerreviewed research reports and reviews), as well as 
 features shared by other traditional hardcopy journals. 
  
 among the advantages of the electronic format are faster dissemination of 
 information, including raw data, and the absence of space constraints 
 because pages do not exist.  (this latter fact creates an interesting 
 situation when it comes to citations.)  nor are there any issues.  aaass 
 capacity to download materials directly from the journal to a 
 subscribers printer, hard drive, or floppy disk helps ensure highly 
 accurate transcription.  other features of ojcct include onscreen alerts 
 that allow linkage of subsequently published documents to the original 
 documents online searching by subject, author, title, etc. indexing of 
 every single word that appears in an article viewing access to an 
 article by component (abstract, full text, or graphs) numbered 
 paragraphs to replace page counts publication in science every thirty 
 days of indexing of all articles published in the journal 
 typesetquality screens and hypertext links that enable subscribers to 
 bring up medline abstracts directly without leaving the journal. 
  
 after detailing the two primary ways to gain access to the journal, 
 through the oclc network and compuserv if one desires graphics or through 
 the internet if just an ascii file is desired, lebron illustrated the 
 speedy editorial process and the coding of the document using sgml tags 
 after it has been accepted for publication.  she also gave an illustrated 
 tour of the journal, its searchandretrieval capabilities in particular, 
 but also including problems associated with scanning in illustrations, 
 and the importance of onscreen alerts to the medical profession re 
 retractions or corrections, or more frequently, editorials, letters to 
 the editors, or followup reports.  she closed by inviting the audience 
 to join aaas on  july, when ojcct was scheduled to go online. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  additional features of ojcct  
  
  
 in the lengthy discussion that followed lebrons presentation, these 
 points emerged 
  
       the sgml text can be tailored as users wish. 
  
       all these articles have a fairly simple document definition. 
  
       documenttype definitions (dtds) were developed and given to ojcct 
      for coding. 
  
       no articles will be removed from the journal.  (because there are 
      no back issues, there are no lost issues either.  once a subscriber 
      logs onto the journal he or she has access not only to the currently 
      published materials, but retrospectively to everything that has been 
      published in it.  thus the table of contents grows bigger.  the date 
      of publication serves to distinguish between currently published 
      materials and older materials.) 
  
       the pricing system for the journal resembles that for most medical 
      journals  for ,  for a year, plus telecommunications charges 
      (there are no connect time charges)    for ,  for the 
      entire year for single users, though the journal can be put on a 
      local area network (lan).  however, only one person can access the 
      journal at a time.  site licenses may come in the future. 
  
       aaas is working closely with colleagues at oclc to display 
      mathematical equations on screen. 
  
       without compromising any steps in the editorial process, the 
      technology has reduced the time lag between when a manuscript is 
      originally submitted and the time it is accepted the review process 
      does not differ greatly from the standard sixtoeight weeks 
      employed by many of the hardcopy journals.  the process still 
      depends on people. 
  
       as far as a preservation copy is concerned, articles will be 
      maintained on the computer permanently and subscribers, as part of 
      their subscription, will receive a microfichequality archival copy 
      of everything published during that year in addition, reprints can 
      be purchased in much the same way as in a hardcopy environment.  
      hard copies are prepared but are not the primary medium for the 
      dissemination of the information. 
  
       because ojcct is not yet on line, it is difficult to know how many 
      people would simply browse through the journal on the screen as 
      opposed to downloading the whole thing and printing it out a mix of 
      both types of users likely will result. 
  
                                   
  
  
 personius  developments in technology over the past decade  the class 
 project  advantages for technology and for the class project  
 developing a network application an underlying assumption of the project 
  details of the scanning process  printondemand copies of books  
 future plans include development of a browsing tool  
  
  
 lynne personius, assistant director, cornell information technologies for 
 scholarly information services, cornell university, first commented on 
 the tremendous impact that developments in technology over the past ten 
 yearsnetworking, in particularhave had on the way information is 
 handled, and how, in her own case, these developments have counterbalanced 
 cornells relative geographical isolation.  other significant technologies 
 include scanners, which are much more sophisticated than they were ten years 
 ago mass storage and the dramatic savings that result from it in terms of 
 both space and money relative to twenty or thirty years ago new and 
 improved printing technologies, which have greatly affected the distribution 
 of information and, of course, digital technologies, whose applicability to 
 library preservation remains at issue. 
  
 given that context, personius described the college library access and 
 storage system (class) project, a library preservation project, 
 primarily, and what has been accomplished.  directly funded by the 
 commission on preservation and access and by the xerox corporation, which 
 has provided a significant amount of hardware, the class project has been 
 working with a development team at xerox to develop a software 
 application tailored to library preservation requirements.  within 
 cornell, participants in the project have been working jointly with both 
 library and information technologies.  the focus of the project has been 
 on reformatting and saving books that are in brittle condition.  
 personius showed workshop participants a brittle book, and described how 
 such books were the result of developments in papermaking around the 
 beginning of the industrial revolution.  the papermaking process was 
 changed so that a significant amount of acid was introduced into the 
 actual paper itself, which deteriorates as it sits on library shelves. 
  
 one of the advantages for technology and for the class project is that 
 the information in brittle books is mostly out of copyright and thus 
 offers an opportunity to work with material that requires library 
 preservation, and to create and work on an infrastructure to save the 
 material.  acknowledging the familiarity of those working in preservation 
 with this information, personius noted that several things are being 
 done  the primary preservation technology used today is photocopying of 
 brittle material.  saving the intellectual content of the material is the 
 main goal.  with microfilm copy, the intellectual content is preserved on 
 the assumption that in the future the image can be reformatted in any 
 other way that then exists. 
  
 an underlying assumption of the class project from the beginning was 
 that it would develop a network application.  project staff scan books 
 at a workstation located in the library, near the brittle material. 
 an imageserver filing system is located at a distance from that 
 workstation, and a printer is located in another building.  all of the 
 materials digitized and stored on the imagefiling system are cataloged 
 in the online catalogue.  in fact, a record for each of these electronic 
 books is stored in the rlin database so that a record exists of what is 
 in the digital library throughout standard catalogue procedures.  in the 
 future, researchers working from their own workstations in their offices, 
 or their networks, will have accesswherever they might bethrough a 
 request server being built into the new digital library.  a second 
 assumption is that the preferred means of finding the material will be by 
 looking through a catalogue.  personius described the scanning process, 
 which uses a prototype scanner being developed by xerox and which scans a 
 very high resolution image at great speed.  another significant feature, 
 because this is a preservation application, is the placing of the pages 
 that fall apart one for one on the platen.  ordinarily, a scanner could 
 be used with some sort of a document feeder, but because of this 
 application that is not feasible.  further, because class is a 
 preservation application, after the paper replacement is made there, a 
 very careful quality control check is performed.  an original book is 
 compared to the printed copy and verification is made, before proceeding, 
 that all of the image, all of the information, has been captured.  then, 
 a new library book is produced  the printed images are rebound by a 
 commercial binder and a new book is returned to the shelf.  
 significantly, the books returned to the library shelves are beautiful 
 and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last a long time, 
 in effect, the equivalent of preservation photocopies.  thus, the project 
 has a library of digital books.  in essence, class is scanning and 
 storing books as  dotperinch bitmapped images, compressed using 
 group  ccitt (i.e., the french acronym for international consultative 
 committee for telegraph and telephone) compression.  they are stored as 
 tiff files on an optical filing system that is composed of a database 
 used for searching and locating the books and an optical jukebox that 
 stores  twelveinch platters.  a veryhighresolution printed copy of 
 these books at  dots per inch is created, using a xerox docutech 
 printer to make the paper replacements on acidfree paper. 
  
 personius maintained that the class project presents an opportunity to 
 introduce people to books as digital images by using a paper medium.  
 books are returned to the shelves while people are also given the ability 
 to print on demandto make their own copies of books.  (personius 
 distributed copies of an engineering journal published by engineering 
 students at cornell around  as an example of what a printondemand 
 copy of material might be like.  this very cheap copy would be available 
 to people to use for their own research purposes and would bridge the gap 
 between an electronic work and the paper that readers like to have.)  
 personius then attempted to illustrate a very early prototype of 
 networked access to this digital library.  xerox corporation has 
 developed a prototype of a view station that can send images across the 
 network to be viewed. 
  
 the particular library brought down for demonstration contained two 
 mathematics books.  class is developing and will spend the next year 
 developing an application that allows people at workstations to browse 
 the books.  thus, class is developing a browsing tool, on the assumption 
 that users do not want to read an entire book from a workstation, but 
 would prefer to be able to look through and decide if they would like to 
 have a printed copy of it. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  re retrieval software  digital file copyright  scanning 
 rate during production  autosegmentation  criteria employed in 
 selecting books for scanning  compression and decompression of images  
 ocr not precluded  
  
  
 during the questionandanswer period that followed her presentation, 
 personius made these additional points 
  
       re retrieval software, cornell is developing a unixbased server 
      as well as clients for the server that support multiple platforms 
      (macintosh, ibm and sun workstations), in the hope that people from 
      any of those platforms will retrieve books a further operating 
      assumption is that standard interfaces will be used as much as 
      possible, where standards can be put in place, because class 
      considers this retrieval software a library application and would 
      like to be able to look at material not only at cornell but at other 
      institutions. 
  
       the phrase digital file copyright by cornell university was 
      added at the advice of cornells legal staff with the caveat that it 
      probably would not hold up in court.  cornell does not want people 
      to copy its books and sell them but would like to keep them 
      available for use in a library environment for library purposes. 
  
       in production the scanner can scan about  pages per hour, 
      capturing  dots per inch. 
  
       the xerox software has filters to scan halftone material and avoid 
      the moire patterns that occur when halftone material is scanned.  
      xerox has been working on hardware and software that would enable 
      the scanner itself to recognize this situation and deal with it 
      appropriatelya kind of autosegmentation that would enable the 
      scanner to handle halftone material as well as text on a single page. 
  
       the books subjected to the elaborate process described above were 
      selected because class is a preservation project, with the first  
      books selected coming from cornells mathematics collection, because 
      they were still being heavily used and because, although they were 
      in need of preservation, the mathematics library and the mathematics 
      faculty were uncomfortable having them microfilmed.  (they wanted a 
      printed copy.)  thus, these books became a logical choice for this 
      project.  other books were chosen by the projects selection committees 
      for experiments with the technology, as well as to meet a demand or need. 
  
       images will be decompressed before they are sent over the line at 
      this time they are compressed and sent to the image filing system 
      and then sent to the printer as compressed images they are returned 
      to the workstation as compressed dpi images and the workstation 
      decompresses and scales them for displayan inefficient way to 
      access the material though it works quite well for printing and 
      other purposes. 
  
       class is also decompressing on macintosh and ibm, a slow process 
      right now.  eventually, compression and decompression will take 
      place on an image conversion server.  tradeoffs will be made, based 
      on future performance testing, concerning where the file is 
      compressed and what resolution image is sent. 
  
       ocr has not been precluded images are being stored that have been 
      scanned at a high resolution, which presumably would suit them well 
      to an ocr process.  because the material being scanned is about  
      years old and was printed with lessthanideal technologies, very 
      early and preliminary tests have not produced good results.  but the 
      project is capturing an image that is of sufficient resolution to be 
      subjected to ocr in the future.  moreover, the system architecture 
      and the system plan have a logical place to store an ocr image if it 
      has been captured.  but that is not being done now. 
  
                                   
  
 session iii.  distribution, networks, and networking  options for 
 dissemination 
  
  
 zich  issues pertaining to cdroms  options for publishing in cdrom  
  
  
 robert zich, special assistant to the associate librarian for special 
 projects, library of congress, and moderator of this session, first noted 
 the blessed but somewhat awkward circumstance of having four very 
 distinguished people representing networks and networking or at least 
 leaning in that direction, while lacking anyone to speak from the 
 strongest possible background in cdroms.  zich expressed the hope that 
 members of the audience would join the discussion.  he stressed the 
 subtitle of this particular session, options for dissemination, and, 
 concerning cdroms, the importance of determining when it would be wise 
 to consider dissemination in cdrom versus networks.  a shopping list of 
 issues pertaining to cdroms included  the grounds for selecting 
 commercial publishers, and inhouse publication where possible versus 
 nonprofit or government publication.  a similar list for networks 
 included  determining when one should consider dissemination through a 
 network, identifying the mechanisms or entities that exist to place items 
 on networks, identifying the pool of existing networks, determining how a 
 producer  would choose between networks, and identifying the elements of 
 a business arrangement in a network. 
  
 options for publishing in cdrom  an outside publisher versus 
 selfpublication.  if an outside publisher is used, it can be nonprofit, 
 such as the government printing office (gpo) or the national technical 
 information service (ntis), in the case of government.  the pros and cons 
 associated with employing an outside publisher are obvious.  among the 
 pros, there is no trouble getting accepted.  one pays the bill and, in 
 effect, goes ones way.  among the cons, when one pays an outside 
 publisher to perform the work, that publisher will perform the work it is 
 obliged to do, but perhaps without the production expertise and skill in 
 marketing and dissemination that some would seek.  there is the body of 
 commercial publishers that do possess that kind of expertise in 
 distribution and marketing but that obviously are selective.  in 
 selfpublication, one exercises full control, but then one must handle 
 matters such as distribution and marketing.  such are some of the options 
 for publishing in the case of cdrom. 
  
 in the case of technical and design issues, which are also important, 
 there are many matters which many at the workshop already knew a good 
 deal about  retrieval system requirements and costs, what to do about 
 images, the various capabilities and platforms, the tradeoffs between 
 cost and performance, concerns about localarea networkability, 
 interoperability, etc. 
  
                                   
  
  
 lynch  creating networked information is different from using networks 
 as an access or dissemination vehicle  networked multimedia on a large 
 scale does not yet work  typical cdrom publication model a twoedged 
 sword  publishing information on a cdrom in the present world of 
 immature standards  contrast between cdrom and network pricing  
 examples demonstrated earlier in the day as a set of insular information 
 gems  paramount need to link databases  layering to become increasingly 
 necessary  project needs and the issues of information reuse and active 
 versus passive use  xwindows as a way of differentiating between 
 network access and networked information  barriers to the distribution 
 of networked multimedia information  need for good, realtime delivery 
 protocols  the question of presentation integrity in clientserver 
 computing in the academic world  recommendations for producing multimedia 
  
  
 clifford lynch, director, library automation, university of california, 
 opened his talk with the general observation that networked information 
 constituted a difficult and elusive topic because it is something just 
 starting to develop and not yet fully understood.  lynch contended that 
 creating genuinely networked information was different from using 
 networks as an access or dissemination vehicle and was more sophisticated 
 and more subtle.  he invited the members of the audience to extrapolate, 
 from what they heard about the preceding demonstration projects, to what 
 sort of a world of electronics informationscholarly, archival, 
 cultural, etc.they wished to end up with ten or fifteen years from now.  
 lynch suggested that to extrapolate directly from these projects would 
 produce unpleasant results. 
  
 putting the issue of cdrom in perspective before getting into 
 generalities on networked information, lynch observed that those engaged 
 in multimedia today who wish to ship a product, so to say, probably do 
 not have much choice except to use cdrom  networked multimedia on a 
 large scale basically does not yet work because the technology does not 
 exist.  for example, anybody who has tried moving images around over the 
 internet knows that this is an exciting touchandgo process, a 
 fascinating and fertile area for experimentation, research, and 
 development, but not something that one can become deeply enthusiastic 
 about committing to production systems at this time. 
  
 this situation will change, lynch said.  he differentiated cdrom from 
 the practices that have been followed up to now in distributing data on 
 cdrom.  for lynch the problem with cdrom is not its portability or its 
 slowness but the twoedged sword of having the retrieval application and 
 the user interface inextricably bound up with the data, which is the 
 typical cdrom publication model.  it is not a case of publishing data 
 but of distributing a typically standalone, typically closed system, 
 allsoftware, user interface, and dataon a little disk.  hence, all 
 the betweendisk navigational issues as well as the impossibility in most 
 cases of integrating data on one disk with that on another.  most cdrom 
 retrieval software does not network very gracefully at present.  however, 
 in the present world of immature standards and lack of understanding of 
 what network information is or what the ground rules are for creating or 
 using it, publishing information on a cdrom does add value in a very 
 real sense. 
  
 lynch drew a contrast between cdrom and network pricing and in doing so 
 highlighted something bizarre in information pricing.  a large 
 institution such as the university of california has vendors who will 
 offer to sell information on cdrom for a price per year in four digits, 
 but for the same data (e.g., an abstracting and indexing database) on 
 magnetic tape, regardless of how many people may use it concurrently, 
 will quote a price in six digits. 
  
 what is packaged with the cdrom in one sense adds valuea complete 
 access system, not just raw, unrefined informationalthough it is not 
 generally perceived that way.  this is because the access software, 
 although it adds value, is viewed by some people, particularly in the 
 university environment where there is a very heavy commitment to 
 networking, as being developed in the wrong direction. 
  
 given that context, lynch described the examples demonstrated as a set of 
 insular information gemsperseus, for example, offers nicely linked 
 information, but would be very difficult to integrate with other 
 databases, that is, to link together seamlessly with other source files 
 from other sources.  it resembles an island, and in this respect is 
 similar to numerous standalone projects that are based on videodiscs, 
 that is, on the singleworkstation concept. 
  
 as scholarship evolves in a network environment, the paramount need will 
 be to link databases.  we must link personal databases to public 
 databases, to group databases, in fairly seamless wayswhich is 
 extremely difficult in the environments under discussion with copies of 
 databases proliferating all over the place. 
  
 the notion of layering also struck lynch as lurking in several of the 
 projects demonstrated.  several databases in a sense constitute 
 information archives without a significant amount of navigation built in.  
 educators, critics, and others will want a layered structureone that 
 defines or links paths through the layers to allow users to reach 
 specific points.  in lynchs view, layering will become increasingly 
 necessary, and not just within a single resource but across resources 
 (e.g., tracing mythology and cultural themes across several classics 
 databases as well as a database of renaissance culture).  this ability to 
 organize resources, to build things out of multiple other things on the 
 network or select pieces of it, represented for lynch one of the key 
 aspects of network information. 
  
 contending that information reuse constituted another significant issue, 
 lynch commended to the audiences attention project needs (i.e., national 
 engineering education delivery system).  this projects objective is to 
 produce a database of engineering courseware as well as the components 
 that can be used to develop new courseware.  in a number of the existing 
 applications, lynch said, the issue of reuse (how much one can take apart 
 and reuse in other applications) was not being well considered.  he also 
 raised the issue of active versus passive use, one aspect of which  is 
 how much information will be manipulated locally by users.  most people, 
 he argued, may do a little browsing and then will wish to print.  lynch 
 was uncertain how these resources would be used by the vast majority of 
 users in the network environment. 
  
 lynch next said a few words about xwindows as a way of differentiating 
 between network access and networked information.  a number of the 
 applications demonstrated at the workshop could be rewritten to use x 
 across the network, so that one could run them from any xcapable device 
 a workstation, an x terminaland transact with a database across the 
 network.  although this opens up access a little, assuming one has enough 
 network to handle it, it does not provide an interface to develop a 
 program that conveniently integrates information from multiple databases.  
 x is a viewing technology that has limits.  in a real sense, it is just a 
 graphical version of remote login across the network.  xtype applications 
 represent only one step in the progression towards real access. 
  
 lynch next discussed barriers to the distribution of networked multimedia 
 information.  the heart of the problem is a lack of standards to provide 
 the ability for computers to talk to each other, retrieve information, 
 and shuffle it around fairly casually.  at the moment, little progress is 
 being made on standards for networked information for example, present 
 standards do not cover images, digital voice, and digital video.  a 
 useful tool kit of exchange formats for basic texts is only now being 
 assembled.  the synchronization of content streams (i.e., synchronizing a 
 voice track to a video track, establishing temporal relations between 
 different components in a multimedia object) constitutes another issue 
 for networked multimedia that is just beginning to receive attention. 
  
 underlying network protocols also need some work good, realtime 
 delivery protocols on the internet do not yet exist.  in lynchs view, 
 highly important in this context is the notion of networked digital 
 object ids, the ability of one object on the network to point to another 
 object (or component thereof) on the network.  serious bandwidth issues 
 also exist.  lynch was uncertain if billionbitpersecond networks would 
 prove sufficient if numerous people ran video in parallel. 
  
 lynch concluded by offering an issue for database creators to consider, 
 as well as several comments about what might constitute good trial 
 multimedia experiments.  in a networked information world the database 
 builder or service builder (publisher) does not exercise the same 
 extensive control over the integrity of the presentation strange 
 programs munge with ones data before the user sees it.  serious 
 thought must be given to what guarantees integrity of presentation.  part 
 of that is related to where one draws the boundaries around a networked 
 information service.  this question of presentation integrity in 
 clientserver computing has not been stressed enough in the academic 
 world, lynch argued, though commercial service providers deal with it 
 regularly. 
  
 concerning multimedia, lynch observed that good multimedia at the moment 
 is hideously expensive to produce.  he recommended producing multimedia 
 with either very high sale value, or multimedia with a very long life 
 span, or multimedia that will have a very broad usage base and whose 
 costs therefore can be amortized among large numbers of users.  in this 
 connection, historical and humanistically oriented material may be a good 
 place to start, because it tends to have a longer life span than much of 
 the scientific material, as well as a wider user base.  lynch noted, for 
 example, that american memory fits many of the criteria outlined.  he 
 remarked the extensive discussion about bringing the internet or the 
 national research and education network (nren) into the k environment 
 as a way of helping the american educational system. 
  
 lynch closed by noting that the kinds of applications demonstrated struck 
 him as excellent justifications of broadscale networking for k, but 
 that at this time no killer application exists to mobilize the k 
 community to obtain connectivity. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  dearth of genuinely interesting applications on the network 
 a slowchanging situation  the issue of the integrity of presentation in 
 a networked environment  several reasons why cdrom software does not 
 network  
  
  
 during the discussion period that followed lynchs presentation, several 
 additional points were made. 
  
 lynch reiterated even more strongly his contention that, historically, 
 once one goes outside highend science and the group of those who need 
 access to supercomputers, there is a great dearth of genuinely 
 interesting applications on the network.  he saw this situation changing 
 slowly, with some of the scientific databases and scholarly discussion 
 groups and electronic journals coming on as well as with the availability 
 of wide area information servers (wais) and some of the databases that 
 are being mounted there.  however, many of those things do not seem to 
 have piqued great popular interest.  for instance, most high school 
 students of lynchs acquaintance would not qualify as devotees of serious 
 molecular biology. 
  
 concerning the issue of the integrity of presentation, lynch believed 
 that a couple of information providers have laid down the law at least on 
 certain things.  for example, his recollection was that the national 
 library of medicine feels strongly that one needs to employ the 
 identifier field if he or she is to mount a database commercially.  the 
 problem with a real networked environment is that one does not know who 
 is reformatting and reprocessing ones data when one enters a client 
 server mode.  it becomes anybodys guess, for example, if the network 
 uses a z. server, or what clients are doing with ones data.  a data 
 provider can say that his contract will only permit clients to have 
 access to his data after he vets them and their presentation and makes 
 certain it suits him.  but lynch held out little expectation that the 
 network marketplace would evolve in that way, because it required too 
 much prior negotiation. 
  
 cdrom software does not network for a variety of reasons, lynch said.  
 he speculated that cdrom publishers are not eager to have their products 
 really hook into wide area networks, because they fear it will make their 
 data suppliers nervous.  moreover, until relatively recently, one had to 
 be rather adroit to run a full tcpip stack plus applications on a 
 pcsize machine, whereas nowadays it is becoming easier as pcs grow 
 bigger and faster.  lynch also speculated that software providers had not 
 heard from their customers until the last year or so, or had not heard 
 from enough of their customers. 
  
                                   
  
  
 besser  implications of disseminating images on the network planning 
 the distribution of multimedia documents poses two critical 
 implementation problems  layered approach represents the way to deal 
 with users capabilities  problems in platform design file size and its 
 implications for networking  transmission of megabyte size images 
 impractical  compression and decompression at the users end  promising 
 trends for compression  a disadvantage of using xwindows  a project at 
 the smithsonian that mounts images on several networks    
  
  
 howard besser, school of library and information science, university of 
 pittsburgh, spoke primarily about multimedia, focusing on images and the 
 broad implications of disseminating them on the network.  he argued that 
 planning the distribution of multimedia documents posed two critical 
 implementation problems, which he framed in the form of two questions  
 ) what platform will one use and what hardware and software will users 
 have for viewing of the material  and ) how can one deliver a 
 sufficiently robust set of information in an accessible format in a 
 reasonable amount of time  depending on whether network or cdrom is the 
 medium used, this question raises different issues of storage, 
 compression, and transmission. 
  
 concerning the design of platforms (e.g., sound, gray scale, simple 
 color, etc.) and the various capabilities users may have, besser 
 maintained that a layered approach was the way to deal with users 
 capabilities.  a result would be that users with less powerful 
 workstations would simply have less functionality.  he urged members of 
 the audience to advocate standards and accompanying software that handle 
 layered functionality across a wide variety of platforms. 
  
 besser also addressed problems in platform design, namely, deciding how 
 large a machine to design for situations when the largest number of users 
 have the lowest level of the machine, and one desires higher 
 functionality.  besser then proceeded to the question of file size and 
 its implications for networking.  he discussed still images in the main.  
 for example, a digital color image that fills the screen of a standard 
 megapel workstation (sun or next) will require one megabyte of storage 
 for an eightbit image or three megabytes of storage for a true color or 
 twentyfourbit image.  lossless compression algorithms (that is, 
 computational procedures in which no data is lost in the process of 
 compressing and decompressing an imagethe exact bitrepresentation is 
 maintained) might bring storage down to a third of a megabyte per image, 
 but not much further than that.  the question of size makes it difficult 
 to fit an appropriately sized set of these images on a single disk or to 
 transmit them quickly enough on a network. 
  
 with these full screen megapel images that constitute a third of a 
 megabyte, one gets ,, fullscreen images on a onegigabyte disk 
 a standard cdrom represents approximately  percent of that.  storing 
 images the size of a pc screen (just  bit color) increases storage 
 capacity to ,, images per gigabyte  percent of that gives 
 one the size of a cdrom, which in turn creates a major problem.  one 
 cannot have fullscreen, fullcolor images with lossless compression one 
 must compress them or use a lower resolution.  for megabytesize images, 
 anything slower than a t speed is impractical.  for example, on a 
 fiftysixkilobaud line, it takes three minutes to transfer a 
 onemegabyte file, if it is not compressed and this speed assumes ideal 
 circumstances (no other user contending for network bandwidth).  thus, 
 questions of disk access, remote display, and current telephone 
 connection speed make transmission of megabytesize images impractical. 
  
 besser then discussed ways to deal with these large images, for example, 
 compression and decompression at the users end.  in this connection, the 
 issues of how much one is willing to lose in the compression process and 
 what image quality one needs in the first place are unknown.  but what is 
 known is that compression entails some loss of data.  besser urged that 
 more studies be conducted on image quality in different situations, for 
 example, what kind of images are needed for what kind of disciplines, and 
 what kind of image quality is needed for a browsing tool, an intermediate 
 viewing tool, and archiving. 
  
 besser remarked two promising trends for compression  from a technical 
 perspective, algorithms that use what is called subjective redundancy 
 employ principles from visual psychophysics to identify and remove 
 information from the image that the human eye cannot perceive from an 
 interchange and interoperability perspective, the jpeg (i.e., joint 
 photographic experts group, an iso standard) compression algorithms also 
 offer promise.  these issues of compression and decompression, besser 
 argued, resembled those raised earlier concerning the design of different 
 platforms.  gauging the capabilities of potential users constitutes a 
 primary goal.  besser advocated layering or separating the images from 
 the applications that retrieve and display them, to avoid tying them to 
 particular software. 
  
 besser detailed several lessons learned from his work at berkeley with 
 imagequery, especially the advantages and disadvantages of using 
 xwindows.  in the latter category, for example, retrieval is tied 
 directly to ones data, an intolerable situation in the long run on a 
 networked system.  finally, besser described a project of jim wallace at 
 the smithsonian institution, who is mounting images in a extremely 
 rudimentary way on the compuserv and genie networks and is preparing to 
 mount them on america on line.  although the average user takes over 
 thirty minutes to download these images (assuming a fairly fast modem), 
 nevertheless, images have been downloaded , times. 
  
 besser concluded his talk with several comments on the business 
 arrangement between the smithsonian and compuserv.  he contended that not 
 enough is known concerning the value of images. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  creating digitized photographic collections nearly 
 impossible except with large organizations like museums  need for study 
 to determine quality of images users will tolerate  
  
  
 during the brief exchange between lesk and besser that followed, several 
 clarifications emerged. 
  
 lesk argued that the photographers were far ahead of besser  it is 
 almost impossible to create such digitized photographic collections 
 except with large organizations like museums, because all the 
 photographic agencies have been going crazy about this and will not sign 
 licensing agreements on any sort of reasonable terms.  lesk had heard 
 that national geographic, for example, had tried to buy the right to use 
 some image in some kind of educational production for  per image, but 
 the photographers will not touch it.  they want accounting and payment 
 for each use, which cannot be accomplished within the system.  besser 
 responded that a consortium of photographers, headed by a former national 
 geographic photographer, had started assembling its own collection of 
 electronic reproductions of images, with the money going back to the 
 cooperative. 
  
 lesk contended that besser was unnecessarily pessimistic about multimedia 
 images, because people are accustomed to lowquality images, particularly 
 from video.  besser urged the launching of a study to determine what 
 users would tolerate, what they would feel comfortable with, and what 
 absolutely is the highest quality they would ever need.  conceding that 
 he had adopted a dire tone in order to arouse people about the issue, 
 besser closed on a sanguine note by saying that he would not be in this 
 business if he did not think that things could be accomplished. 
  
                                   
  
  
 larsen  issues of scalability and modularity  geometric growth of the 
 internet and the role played by layering  basic functions sustaining 
 this growth  a librarys roles and functions in a network environment  
 effects of implementation of the z. protocol for information 
 retrieval on the library system  the tradeoff between volumes of data 
 and its potential usage  a snapshot of current trends  
  
  
 ronald larsen, associate director for information technology, university 
 of maryland at college park, first addressed the issues of scalability 
 and modularity.  he noted the difficulty of anticipating the effects of 
 ordersofmagnitude growth, reflecting on the twenty years of experience 
 with the arpanet and internet.  recalling the days demonstrations of 
 cdrom and optical disk material, he went on to ask if the field has yet 
 learned how to scale new systems to enable delivery and dissemination 
 across largescale networks. 
  
 larsen focused on the geometric growth of the internet from its inception 
 circa  to the present, and the adjustments required to respond to 
 that rapid growth.  to illustrate the issue of scalability, larsen 
 considered computer networks as including three generic components  
 computers, network communication nodes, and communication media.  each 
 component scales (e.g., computers range from pcs to supercomputers 
 network nodes scale from interface cards in a pc through sophisticated 
 routers and gateways and communication media range from ,baud 
 dialup facilities through .mbps backbone links, and eventually to 
 multigigabitpersecond communication lines), and architecturally, the 
 components are organized to scale hierarchically from local area networks 
 to internationalscale networks.  such growth is made possible by 
 building layers of communication protocols, as besser pointed out. 
 by layering both physically and logically, a sense of scalability is 
 maintained from local area networks in offices, across campuses, through 
 bridges, routers, campus backbones, fiberoptic links, etc., up into 
 regional networks and ultimately into national and international 
 networks. 
  
 larsen then illustrated the geometric growth over a twoyear period 
 through september of the number of networks that comprise the 
 internet.  this growth has been sustained largely by the availability of 
 three basic functions  electronic mail, file transfer (ftp), and remote 
 logon (telnet).  larsen also reviewed the growth in the kind of traffic 
 that occurs on the network.  network traffic reflects the joint contributions 
 of a larger population of users and increasing use per user.  today one sees 
 serious applications involving moving images across the networka rarity 
 ten years ago.  larsen recalled and concurred with bessers main point 
 that the interesting problems occur at the application level. 
  
 larsen then illustrated a model of a librarys roles and functions in a 
 network environment.  he noted, in particular, the placement of online 
 catalogues onto the network and patrons obtaining access to the library 
 increasingly through local networks, campus networks, and the internet.  
 larsen supported lynchs earlier suggestion that we need to address 
 fundamental questions of networked information in order to build 
 environments that scale in the information sense as well as in the 
 physical sense. 
  
 larsen supported the role of the library system as the access point into 
 the nations electronic collections.  implementation of the z. 
 protocol for information retrieval would make such access practical and 
 feasible.  for example, this would enable patrons in maryland to search 
 california libraries, or other libraries around the world that are 
 conformant with z. in a manner that is familiar to university of 
 maryland patrons.  this clientserver model also supports moving beyond 
 secondary content into primary content.  (the notion of how one links 
 from secondary content to primary content, larsen said, represents a 
 fundamental problem that requires rigorous thought.)  after noting 
 numerous network experiments in accessing fulltext materials, including 
 projects supporting the ordering of materials across the network, larsen 
 revisited the issue of transmitting highdensity, highresolution color 
 images across the network and the large amounts of bandwidth they 
 require.  he went on to address the bandwidth and synchronization 
 problems inherent in sending fullmotion video across the network. 
  
 larsen illustrated the tradeoff between volumes of data in bytes or 
 orders of magnitude and the potential usage of that data.  he discussed 
 transmission rates (particularly, the time it takes to move various forms 
 of information), and what one could do with a network supporting 
 multigigabitpersecond transmission.  at the moment, the network 
 environment includes a composite of datatransmission requirements, 
 volumes and forms, going from steady to bursty (highvolume) and from 
 very slow to very fast.  this aggregate must be considered in the design, 
 construction, and operation of multigigabyte networks. 
  
 larsens objective is to use the networks and library systems now being 
 constructed to increase access to resources wherever they exist, and 
 thus, to evolve toward an online electronic virtual library. 
  
 larsen concluded by offering a snapshot of current trends  continuing 
 geometric growth in network capacity and number of users slower 
 development of applications and glacial development and adoption of 
 standards.  the challenge is to design and develop each new application 
 system with network access and scalability in mind. 
  
                                   
  
  
 brownrigg  access to the internet cannot be taken for granted  packet 
 radio and the development of melvyl in  in the division of library 
 automation at the university of california    design criteria for packet 
 radio  a demonstration project in san diego and future plans  spread 
 spectrum  frequencies at which the radios will run and plans to 
 reimplement the wais server software in the public domain  need for an 
 infrastructure of radios that do not move around   
  
  
 edwin brownrigg, executive director, memex research institute, first 
 polled the audience in order to seek out regular users of the internet as 
 well as those planning to use it some time in the future.  with nearly 
 everybody in the room falling into one category or the other, brownrigg 
 made a point re access, namely that numerous individuals, especially those 
 who use the internet every day, take for granted their access to it, the 
 speeds with which they are connected, and how well it all works.  
 however, as brownrigg discovered between  and  in australia, 
 if one wants access to the internet but cannot afford it or has some 
 physical boundary that prevents her or him from gaining access, it can 
 be extremely frustrating.  he suggested that because of economics and 
 physical barriers we were beginning to create a world of haves and havenots 
 in the process of scholarly communication, even in the united states. 
  
 brownrigg detailed the development of melvyl in academic year  in 
 the division of library automation at the university of california, in 
 order to underscore the issue of access to the system, which at the 
 outset was extremely limited.  in short, the project needed to build a 
 network, which at that time entailed use of satellite technology, that is, 
 putting earth stations on campus and also acquiring some terrestrial links 
 from the state of californias microwave system.  the installation of 
 satellite links, however, did not solve the problem (which actually 
 formed part of a larger problem involving politics and financial resources). 
 for while the project team could get a signal onto a campus, it had no means 
 of distributing the signal throughout the campus.  the solution involved 
 adopting a recent development in wireless communication called packet radio, 
 which combined the basic notion of packetswitching with radio.  the project 
 used this technology to get the signal from a point on campus where it 
 came down, an earth station for example, into the libraries, because it 
 found that wiring the libraries, especially the older marble buildings, 
 would cost ,, per terminal. 
  
 brownrigg noted that, ten years ago, the project had neither the public 
 policy nor the technology that would have allowed it to use packet radio 
 in any meaningful way.  since then much had changed.  he proceeded to 
 detail research and development of the technology, how it is being 
 deployed in california, and what direction he thought it would take. 
 the design criteria are to produce a highspeed, onetime, lowcost, 
 highquality, secure, licensefree device (packet radio) that one can 
 plug in and play today, forget about it, and have access to the internet.  
 by high speed, brownrigg meant  megabyte and . megabytes.  those units 
 have been built, he continued, and are in the process of being 
 typecertified by an independent underwriting laboratory so that they can 
 be typelicensed by the federal communications commission.  as is the 
 case with citizens band, one will be able to purchase a unit and not have 
 to worry about applying for a license. 
  
 the basic idea, brownrigg elaborated, is to take highspeed radio data 
 transmission and create a backbone network that at certain strategic 
 points in the network will gateway into a mediumspeed packet radio 
 (i.e., one that runs at . kilobytes), so that perhaps by  
 people, like those in the audience for the price of a vcr could purchase 
 a mediumspeed radio for the office or home, have full network connectivity 
 to the internet, and partake of all its services, with no need for an fcc 
 license and no regular bill from the local common carrier.  brownrigg 
 presented several details of a demonstration project currently taking 
 place in san diego and described plans, pending funding, to install a 
 fullbore network in the san francisco area.  this network will have  
 nodes running at backbone speeds, and  of these nodes will be libraries, 
 which in turn will be the gateway ports to the . kilobyte radios that 
 will give coverage for the neighborhoods surrounding the libraries. 
  
 brownrigg next explained part ., a new rule within title  of the 
 code of federal regulations enacted by the fcc in .  this rule 
 challenged the industry, which has only now risen to the occasion, to 
 build a radio that would run at no more than one watt of output power and 
 use a fairly exotic method of modulating the radio wave called spread 
 spectrum.  spread spectrum in fact permits the building of networks so 
 that numerous data communications can occur simultaneously, without 
 interfering with each other, within the same wide radio channel. 
  
 brownrigg explained that the frequencies at which the radios would run 
 are very short wave signals.  they are well above standard microwave and 
 radar.  with a radio wave that small, one watt becomes a tremendous punch 
 per bit and thus makes transmission at reasonable speed possible.  in 
 order to minimize the potential for congestion, the project is 
 undertaking to reimplement software which has been available in the 
 networking business and is taken for granted now, for example, tcpip, 
 routing algorithms, bridges, and gateways.  in addition, the project 
 plans to take the wais server software in the public domain and 
 reimplement it so that one can have a wais server on a mac instead of a 
 unix machine.  the memex research institute believes that libraries, in 
 particular, will want to use the wais servers with packet radio.  this 
 project, which has a team of about twelve people, will run through  
 and will include the  libraries already mentioned as well as other 
 professionals such as those in the medical profession, engineering, and 
 law.  thus, the need is to create an infrastructure of radios that do not 
 move around, which, brownrigg hopes, will solve a problem not only for 
 libraries but for individuals who, by and large today, do not have access 
 to the internet from their homes and offices. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  project operating frequencies  
  
  
 during a brief discussion period, which also concluded the days 
 proceedings, brownrigg stated that the project was operating in four 
 frequencies.  the slow speed is operating at  megahertz, and it would 
 later go up to  megahertz.  with the highspeed frequency, the 
 onemegabyte radios will run at . gigabits, and . will run at ..  
 at ., rain can be a factor, but it would have to be tropical rain, 
 unlike what falls in most parts of the united states. 
  
                                   
  
 session iv.  image capture, text capture, overview of text and 
              image storage formats 
  
 william hooton, vice president of operations, inet, moderated this session. 
  
  
 kenney  factors influencing development of cxp  advantages of using 
 digital technology versus photocopy and microfilm  a primary goal of 
 cxp publishing challenges  characteristics of copies printed  quality 
 of samples achieved in image capture  several factors to be considered 
 in choosing scanning  emphasis of cxp on timely and costeffective 
 production of blackandwhite printed facsimiles  results of producing 
 microfilm from digital files  advantages of creating microfilm  details 
 concerning production  costs  role of digital technology in library 
 preservation  
  
  
 anne kenney, associate director, department of preservation and 
 conservation, cornell university, opened her talk by observing that the 
 cornell xerox project (cxp) has been guided by the assumption that the 
 ability to produce printed facsimiles or to replace paper with paper 
 would be important, at least for the present generation of users and 
 equipment.  she described three factors that influenced development of 
 the project  ) because the project has emphasized the preservation of 
 deteriorating brittle books, the quality of what was produced had to be 
 sufficiently high to return a paper replacement to the shelf.  cxp was 
 only interested in using  ) a system that was costeffective, which 
 meant that it had to be costcompetitive with the processes currently 
 available, principally photocopy and microfilm, and ) new or currently 
 available product hardware and software. 
  
 kenney described the advantages that using digital technology offers over 
 both photocopy and microfilm  ) the potential exists to create a higher 
 quality reproduction of a deteriorating original than conventional 
 lightlens technology.  ) because a digital image is an encoded 
 representation, it can be reproduced again and again with no resulting 
 loss of quality, as opposed to the situation with lightlens processes, 
 in which there is discernible difference between a second and a 
 subsequent generation of an image.  ) a digital image can be manipulated 
 in a number of ways to improve image capture for example, xerox has 
 developed a windowing application that enables one to capture a page 
 containing both text and illustrations in a manner that optimizes the 
 reproduction of both.  (with lightlens technology, one must choose which 
 to optimize, text or the illustration in preservation microfilming, the 
 current practice is to shoot an illustrated page twice, once to highlight 
 the text and the second time to provide the best capture for the 
 illustration.)  ) a digital image can also be edited, density levels 
 adjusted to remove underlining and stains, and to increase legibility for 
 faint documents.  ) onscreen inspection can take place at the time of 
 initial setup and adjustments made prior to scanning, factors that 
 substantially reduce the number of retakes required in quality control. 
  
 a primary goal of cxp has been to evaluate the paper output printed on 
 the xerox docutech, a highspeed printer that produces dpi pages from 
 scanned images at a rate of  pages a minute.  kenney recounted several 
 publishing challenges to represent faithful and legible reproductions of 
 the originals that the dpi copy for the most part successfully 
 captured.  for example, many of the deteriorating volumes in the project 
 were heavily illustrated with fine line drawings or halftones or came in 
 languages such as japanese, in which the buildup of characters comprised 
 of varying strokes is difficult to reproduce at lower resolutions a 
 surprising number of them came with annotations and mathematical 
 formulas, which it was critical to be able to duplicate exactly. 
  
 kenney noted that ) the copies are being printed on paper that meets the 
 ansi standards for performance, ) the docutech printer meets the machine 
 and toner requirements for proper adhesion of print to page, as described 
 by the national archives, and thus ) paper product is considered to be 
 the archival equivalent of preservation photocopy. 
  
 kenney then discussed several samples of the quality achieved in the 
 project that had been distributed in a handout, for example, a copy of a 
 printondemand version of the  reed lecture on the steam turbine, 
 which contains halftones, line drawings, and illustrations embedded in 
 text the first four loose pages in the volume compared the capture 
 capabilities of scanning to photocopy for a standard test target, the 
 ieee standard a  test chart.  in all instances scanning proved 
 superior to photocopy, though only slightly more so in one. 
  
 conceding the simplistic nature of her review of the quality of scanning 
 to photocopy, kenney described it as one representation of the kinds of 
 settings that could be used with scanning capabilities on the equipment 
 cxp uses.  kenney also pointed out that cxp investigated the quality 
 achieved with binary scanning only, and noted the great promise in gray 
 scale and color scanning, whose advantages and disadvantages need to be 
 examined.  she argued further that scanning resolutions and file formats 
 can represent a complex tradeoff between the time it takes to capture 
 material, file size, fidelity to the original, and onscreen display and 
 printing and equipment availability.  all these factors must be taken 
 into consideration. 
  
 cxp placed primary emphasis on the production in a timely and 
 costeffective manner of printed facsimiles that consisted largely of 
 blackandwhite text.  with binary scanning, large files may be 
 compressed efficiently and in a lossless manner (i.e., no data is lost in 
 the process of compressing and decompressing an imagethe exact 
 bitrepresentation is maintained) using group  ccitt (i.e., the french 
 acronym for international consultative committee for telegraph and 
 telephone) compression.  cxp was getting compression ratios of about 
 forty to one.  grayscale compression, which primarily uses jpeg, is much 
 less economical and can represent a lossy compression (i.e., not 
 lossless), so that as one compresses and decompresses, the illustration 
 is subtly changed.  while binary files produce a highquality printed 
 version, it appears ) that other combinations of spatial resolution with 
 gray andor color hold great promise as well, and ) that gray scale can 
 represent a tremendous advantage for onscreen viewing.  the quality 
 associated with binary and gray scale also depends on the equipment used.  
 for instance, binary scanning produces a much better copy on a binary 
 printer. 
  
 among cxps findings concerning the production of microfilm from digital 
 files, kenney reported that the digital files for the same reed lecture 
 were used to produce sample film using an electron beam recorder.  the 
 resulting film was faithful to the image capture of the digital files, 
 and while cxp felt that the text and image pages represented in the reed 
 lecture were superior to that of the lightlens film, the resolution 
 readings for the  dpi were not as high as standard microfilming.  
 kenney argued that the standards defined for lightlens technology are 
 not totally transferable to a digital environment.  moreover, they are 
 based on definition of quality for a preservation copy.  although making 
 this case will prove to be a long, uphill struggle, cxp plans to continue 
 to investigate the issue over the course of the next year. 
  
 kenney concluded this portion of her talk with a discussion of the 
 advantages of creating film  it can serve as a primary backup and as a 
 preservation master to the digital file it could then become the print 
 or production master and service copies could be paper, film, optical 
 disks, magnetic media, or onscreen display. 
  
 finally, kenney presented details re production 
  
       development and testing of a moderatelyhigh resolution production 
      scanning workstation represented a third goal of cxp to date, , 
      volumes have been scanned, or about , images. 
  
       the resulting digital files are stored and used to produce 
      hardcopy replacements for the originals and additional prints on 
      demand although the initial costs are high, scanning technology 
      offers an affordable means for reformatting brittle material. 
  
       a technician in production mode can scan  pages per hour when 
      performing singlesheet scanning, which is a necessity when working 
      with truly brittle paper this figure is expected to increase 
      significantly with subsequent iterations of the software from xerox 
      a threemonth timeandcost study of scanning found that the average 
      page book would take about an hour and forty minutes to scan 
      (this figure included the time for setup, which involves keying in 
      primary bibliographic data, going into quality control mode to 
      define page size, establishing fronttoback registration, and 
      scanning sample pages to identify a default range of settings for 
      the entire bookfunctions not dissimilar to those performed by 
      filmers or those preparing a book for photocopy). 
  
       the final step in the scanning process involved rescans, which 
      happily were few and far between, representing well under  percent 
      of the total pages scanned. 
  
 in addition to technician time, cxp costed out equipment, amortized over 
 four years, the cost of storing and refreshing the digital files every 
 four years, and the cost of printing and binding, bookcloth binding, a 
 paper reproduction.  the total amounted to a little under  per single 
 page volume, with  percent overhead includeda figure competitive 
 with the prices currently charged by photocopy vendors. 
  
 of course, with scanning, in addition to the paper facsimile, one is left 
 with a digital file from which subsequent copies of the book can be 
 produced for a fraction of the cost of photocopy, with readers afforded 
 choices in the form of these copies. 
  
 kenney concluded that digital technology offers an electronic means for a 
 library preservation effort to pay for itself.  if a brittlebook program 
 included the means of disseminating reprints of books that are in demand 
 by libraries and researchers alike, the initial investment in capture 
 could be recovered and used to preserve additional but less popular 
 books.  she disclosed that an economic model for a selfsustaining 
 program could be developed for cxps report to the commission on 
 preservation and access (cpa). 
  
 kenney stressed that the focus of cxp has been on obtaining high quality 
 in a production environment.  the use of digital technology is viewed as 
 an affordable alternative to other reformatting options. 
  
                                   
  
  
 andre  overview and history of natdp  various agricultural cdrom 
 products created inhouse and by service bureaus  pilot project on 
 internet transmission  additional products in progress  
  
  
 pamela andre, associate director for automation, national agricultural 
 text digitizing program (natdp), national agricultural library (nal), 
 presented an overview of natdp, which has been underway at nal the last 
 four years, before judith zidar discussed the technical details.  andre 
 defined agricultural information as a broad range of material going from 
 basic and applied research in the hard sciences to the onepage pamphlets 
 that are distributed by the cooperative state extension services on such 
 things as how to grow blueberries. 
  
 natdp began in late  with a meeting of representatives from the 
 landgrant library community to deal with the issue of electronic 
 information.  nal and fortyfive of these libraries banded together to 
 establish this projectto evaluate the technology for converting what 
 were then source documents in paper form into electronic form, to provide 
 access to that digital information, and then to distribute it.  
 distributing that material to the communitythe university community as 
 well as the extension service community, potentially down to the county 
 levelconstituted the groups chief concern. 
  
 since january  (when the microcomputerbased scanning system was 
 installed at nal), natdp has done a variety of things, concerning which 
 zidar would provide further details.  for example, the first technology 
 considered in the projects discussion phase was digital videodisc, which 
 indicates how long ago it was conceived. 
  
 over the four years of this project, four separate cdrom products on 
 four different agricultural topics were created, two at a 
 scanningandocr station installed at nal, and two by service bureaus.  
 thus, natdp has gained comparative information in terms of those relative 
 costs.  each of these products contained the full ascii text as well as 
 page images of the material, or between , and , pages of material 
 on these disks.  topics included aquaculture, food, agriculture and 
 science (i.e., international agriculture and research), acid rain, and 
 agent orange, which was the final product distributed (approximately 
 eighteen months before the workshop). 
  
 the third phase of natdp focused on delivery mechanisms other than 
 cdrom.  at the suggestion of clifford lynch, who was a technical 
 consultant to the project at this point, natdp became involved with the 
 internet and initiated a project with the help of north carolina state 
 university, in which fourteen of the landgrant university libraries are 
 transmitting digital images over the internet in response to interlibrary 
 loan requestsa topic for another meeting.  at this point, the pilot 
 project had been completed for about a year and the final report would be 
 available shortly after the workshop.  in the meantime, the projects 
 success had led to its extension.  (andre noted that one of the first 
 things done under the program title was to select a retrieval package to 
 use with subsequent products windows personal librarian was the package 
 of choice after a lengthy evaluation.) 
    
 three additional products had been planned and were in progress 
  
      ) an arrangement with the american society of agronomya 
      professional society that has published the agronomy journal since 
      about to scan and create bitmapped images of its journal.  
      asa granted permission first to put and then to distribute this 
      material in electronic form, to hold it at nal, and to use these 
      electronic images as a mechanism to deliver documents or print out 
      material for patrons, among other uses.  effectively, nal has the 
      right to use this material in support of its program.  
      (significantly, this arrangement offers a potential cooperative 
      model for working with other professional societies in agriculture 
      to try to do the same thingput the journals of particular interest 
      to agriculture research into electronic form.) 
  
      ) an extension of the earlier product on aquaculture. 
  
      ) the george washington carver papersa joint project with 
      tuskegee university to scan and convert from microfilm some , 
      images of carvers papers, letters, and drawings. 
  
 it was anticipated that all of these products would appear no more than 
 six months after the workshop. 
  
                                   
  
  
 zidar  (a separate arena for scanning)  steps in creating a database  
 image capture, with and without performing ocr  keying in tracking data 
  scanning, with electronic and manual tracking  adjustments during 
 scanning process  scanning resolutions  compression  deskewing and 
 filtering  image capture from microform  the papers and letters of 
 george washington carver  equipment used for a scanning system   
  
  
 judith zidar, coordinator, national agricultural text digitizing program 
 (natdp), national agricultural library (nal), illustrated the technical 
 details of natdp, including her primary responsibility, scanning and 
 creating databases on a topic and putting them on cdrom. 
  
 (zidar remarked a separate arena from the cdrom projects, although the 
 processing of the material is nearly identical, in which natdp is also 
 scanning material and loading it on a next microcomputer, which in turn 
 is linked to nals integrated library system.  thus, searches in nals 
 bibliographic database will enable people to pull up actual page images 
 and text for any documents that have been entered.) 
  
 in accordance with the sessions topic, zidar focused her illustrated 
 talk on image capture, offering a primer on the three main steps in the 
 process  ) assemble the printed publications ) design the database 
 (database design occurs in the process of preparing the material for 
 scanning this step entails reviewing and organizing the material, 
 defining the contentswhat will constitute a record, what kinds of 
 fields will be captured in terms of author, title, etc.) ) perform a 
 certain amount of markup on the paper publications.  nal performs this 
 task record by record, preparing work sheets or some other sort of 
 tracking material and designing descriptors and other enhancements to be 
 added to the data that will not be captured from the printed publication.  
 part of this process also involves determining natdps file and directory 
 structure  natdp attempts to avoid putting more than approximately  
 images in a directory, because placing more than that on a cdrom would 
 reduce the access speed. 
  
 this upfront process takes approximately two weeks for a 
 ,,page database.  the next step is to capture the page images.  
 how long this process takes is determined by the decision whether or not 
 to perform ocr.  not performing ocr speeds the process, whereas text 
 capture requires greater care because of the quality of the image  it 
 has to be straighter and allowance must be made for text on a page, not 
 just for the capture of photographs. 
  
 natdp keys in tracking data, that is, a standard bibliographic record 
 including the title of the book and the title of the chapter, which will 
 later either become the access information or will be attached to the 
 front of a fulltext record so that it is searchable. 
  
 images are scanned from a bound or unbound publication, chiefly from 
 bound publications in the case of natdp, however, because often they are 
 the only copies and the publications are returned to the shelves.  natdp 
 usually scans one record at a time, because its database tracking system 
 tracks the document in that way and does not require further logical 
 separating of the images.  after performing optical character 
 recognition, natdp moves the images off the hard disk and maintains a 
 volume sheet.  though the system tracks electronically, all the 
 processing steps are also tracked manually with a log sheet. 
  
 zidar next illustrated the kinds of adjustments that one can make when 
 scanning from paper and microfilm, for example, redoing images that need 
 special handling, setting for dithering or gray scale, and adjusting for 
 brightness or for the whole book at one time. 
  
 natdp is scanning at  dots per inch, a standard scanning resolution.  
 though adequate for capturing text that is all of a standard size,  
 dpi is unsuitable for any kind of photographic material or for very small 
 text.  many scanners allow for different image formats, tiff, of course, 
 being a de facto standard.  but if one intends to exchange images with 
 other people, the ability to scan other image formats, even if they are 
 less common, becomes highly desirable. 
  
 ccitt group  is the standard compression for normal blackandwhite 
 images, jpeg for gray scale or color.   zidar recommended ) using the 
 standard compressions, particularly if one attempts to make material 
 available and to allow users to download images and reuse them from 
 cdroms and ) maintaining the ability to output an uncompressed image, 
 because in image exchange uncompressed images are more likely to be able 
 to cross platforms. 
  
 zidar emphasized the importance of deskewing and filtering as 
 requirements on natdps upgraded system.  for instance, scanning bound 
 books, particularly books published by the federal government whose pages 
 are skewed, and trying to scan them straight if ocr is to be performed, 
 is extremely timeconsuming.  the same holds for filtering of 
 poorquality or older materials. 
  
 zidar described image capture from microform, using as an example three 
 reels from a sixtysevenreel set of the papers and letters of george 
 washington carver that had been produced by tuskegee university.  these 
 resulted in approximately , images, which natdp had had scanned by 
 its service contractor, science applications international corporation 
 (saic).  natdp also created bibliographic records for access.  (natdp did 
 not have such specialized equipment as a microfilm scanner. 
  
 unfortunately, the process of scanning from microfilm was not an 
 unqualified success, zidar reported  because microfilm frame sizes vary, 
 occasionally some frames were missed, which without spending much time 
 and money could not be recaptured. 
  
 ocr could not be performed from the scanned images of the frames.  the 
 bleeding in the text simply output text, when ocr was run, that could not 
 even be edited.  natdp tested for negative versus positive images, 
 landscape versus portrait orientation, and single versus dualpage 
 microfilm, none of which seemed to affect the quality of the image but 
 also on none of them could ocr be performed. 
  
 in selecting the microfilm they would use, therefore, natdp had other 
 factors in mind.  zidar noted two factors that influenced the quality of 
 the images  ) the inherent quality of the original and ) the amount of 
 size reduction on the pages. 
  
 the carver papers were selected because they are informative and visually 
 interesting, treat a single subject, and are valuable in their own right.  
 the images were scanned and divided into logical records by saic, then 
 delivered, and loaded onto natdps system, where bibliographic 
 information taken directly from the images was added.  scanning was 
 completed in summer  and by the end of summer  the disk was 
 scheduled to be published. 
  
 problems encountered during processing included the following  because 
 the microfilm scanning had to be done in a batch, adjustment for 
 individual page variations was not possible.  the frame size varied on 
 account of the nature of the material, and therefore some of the frames 
 were missed while others were just partial frames.  the only way to go 
 back and capture this material was to print out the page with the 
 microfilm reader from the missing frame and then scan it in from the 
 page, which was extremely timeconsuming.  the quality of the images 
 scanned from the printout of the microfilm compared unfavorably with that 
 of the original images captured directly from the microfilm.  the 
 inability to perform ocr also was a major disappointment.  at the time, 
 computer output microfilm was unavailable to test. 
  
 the equipment used for a scanning system was the last topic addressed by 
 zidar.  the type of equipment that one would purchase for a scanning 
 system included  a microcomputer, at least a , but preferably a  
 a large hard disk,  megabyte at minimum a multitasking operating 
 system that allows one to run some things in batch in the background 
 while scanning or doing text editing, for example, unix or os and, 
 theoretically, windows a highspeed scanner and scanning software that 
 allows one to make the various adjustments mentioned earlier a 
 highresolution monitor ( dpi ) ocr software and hardware to perform 
 text recognition an optical disk subsystem on which to archive all the 
 images as the processing is done file management and tracking software. 
  
 zidar opined that the software one purchases was more important than the 
 hardware and might also cost more than the hardware, but it was likely to 
 prove critical to the success or failure of ones system.  in addition to 
 a standalone scanning workstation for image capture, then, text capture 
 requires one or two editing stations networked to this scanning station 
 to perform editing.  editing the text takes two or three times as long as 
 capturing the images. 
  
 finally, zidar stressed the importance of buying an open system that allows 
 for more than one vendor, complies with standards, and can be upgraded. 
  
                                   
  
  
 waters yale university librarys master plan to convert microfilm to 
 digital imagery (pob)  the place of electronic tools in the library of 
 the future  the uses of images and an image library  primary input from 
 preservation microfilm  features distinguishing pob from cxp and key 
 hypotheses guiding pob  use of vendor selection process to facilitate 
 organizational work  criteria for selecting vendor  finalists and 
 results of process for yale  key factor distinguishing vendors  
 components, design principles, and some estimated costs of pob  role of 
 preservation materials in developing imaging market  factors affecting 
 quality and cost  factors affecting the usability of complex documents 
 in image form   
  
  
 donald waters, head of the systems office, yale university library, 
 reported on the progress of a master plan for a project at yale to 
 convert microfilm to digital imagery, project open book (pob).  stating 
 that pob was in an advanced stage of planning, waters detailed, in 
 particular, the process of selecting a vendor partner and several key 
 issues under discussion as yale prepares to move into the project itself.  
 he commented first on the vision that serves as the context of pob and 
 then described its purpose and scope. 
  
 waters sees the library of the future not necessarily as an electronic 
 library but as a place that generates, preserves, and improves for its 
 clients ready access to both intellectual and physical recorded 
 knowledge.  electronic tools must find a place in the library in the 
 context of this vision.  several roles for electronic tools include 
 serving as  indirect sources of electronic knowledge or as finding 
 aids (the online catalogues, the articlelevel indices, registers for 
 documents and archives) direct sources of recorded knowledge fulltext 
 images and various kinds of compound sources of recorded knowledge (the 
 socalled compound documents of hypertext, mixed text and image, 
 mixedtext image format, and multimedia). 
  
 pob is looking particularly at images and an image library, the uses to 
 which images will be put (e.g., storage, printing, browsing, and then use 
 as input for other processes), ocr as a subsequent process to image 
 capture, or creating an image library, and also possibly generating 
 microfilm. 
  
 while input will come from a variety of sources, pob is considering 
 especially input from preservation microfilm.  a possible outcome is that 
 the film and paper which provide the input for the image library 
 eventually may go off into remote storage, and that the image library may 
 be the primary access tool. 
  
 the purpose and scope of pob focus on imaging.  though related to cxp, 
 pob has two features which distinguish it  ) scaleconversion of 
 , volumes into digital image form and ) sourceconversion from 
 microfilm.  given these features, several key working hypotheses guide 
 pob, including  ) since pob is using microfilm, it is not concerned with 
 the image library as a preservation medium.  ) digital imagery can improve 
 access to recorded knowledge through printing and network distribution at 
 a modest incremental cost of microfilm.  ) capturing and storing documents 
 in a digital image form is necessary to further improvements in access. 
 (pob distinguishes between the imaging, digitizing process and ocr, 
 which at this stage it does not plan to perform.) 
  
 currently in its first or organizational phase, pob found that it could 
 use a vendor selection process to facilitate a good deal of the 
 organizational work (e.g., creating a project team and advisory board, 
 confirming the validity of the plan, establishing the cost of the project 
 and a budget, selecting the materials to convert, and then raising the 
 necessary funds). 
  
 pob developed numerous selection criteria, including  a firm committed 
 to imagedocument management, the ability to serve as systems integrator 
 in a largescale project over several years, interest in developing the 
 requisite software as a standard rather than a custom product, and a 
 willingness to invest substantial resources in the project itself. 
  
 two vendors, dec and xerox, were selected as finalists in october , 
 and with the support of the commission on preservation and access, each 
 was commissioned to generate a detailed requirements analysis for the 
 project and then to submit a formal proposal for the completion of the 
 project, which included a budget and costs. the terms were that pob would 
 pay the loser.  the results for yale of involving a vendor included  
 broad involvement of yale staff across the board at a relatively low 
 cost, which may have longterm significance in carrying out the project 
 (twentyfive to thirty university people are engaged in pob) better 
 understanding of the factors that affect corporate response to markets 
 for imaging products a competitive proposal and a more sophisticated 
 view of the imaging markets. 
  
 the most important factor that distinguished the vendors under 
 consideration was their identification with the customer.  the size and 
 internal complexity of the company also was an important factor.  pob was 
 looking at large companies that had substantial resources.  in the end, 
 the process generated for yale two competitive proposals, with xeroxs 
 the clear winner.  waters then described the components of the proposal, 
 the design principles, and some of the costs estimated for the process. 
  
 components are essentially four  a conversion subsystem, a 
 networkaccessible storage subsystem for , books (and pob expects 
  to  dpi storage), browsing stations distributed on the campus 
 network, and network access to the image printers. 
  
 among the design principles, pob wanted conversion at the highest 
 possible resolution.  assuming tiff files, tiff files with group  
 compression, tcpip, and ethernet network on campus, pob wanted a 
 clientserver approach with image documents distributed to the 
 workstations and made accessible through native workstation interfaces 
 such as windows.  pob also insisted on a phased approach to 
 implementation  ) a standalone, singleuser, lowcost entry into the 
 business with a workstation focused on conversion and allowing pob to 
 explore user access ) movement into a highervolume conversion with 
 networkaccessible storage and multiple access stations and ) a 
 highvolume conversion, fullcapacity storage, and multiple browsing 
 stations distributed throughout the campus. 
  
 the costs proposed for startup assumed the existence of the yale network 
 and its two docutech image printers.  other startup costs are estimated 
 at  million over the three phases.  at the end of the project, the annual 
 operating costs estimated primarily for the software and hardware proposed 
 come to about ,, but these exclude costs for labor needed in the 
 conversion process, network and printer usage, and facilities management. 
  
 finally, the selection process produced for yale a more sophisticated 
 view of the imaging markets  the management of complex documents in 
 image form is not a preservation problem, not a library problem, but a 
 general problem in a broad, general industry.  preservation materials are 
 useful for developing that market because of the qualities of the 
 material.  for example, much of it is out of copyright.  the resolution 
 of key issues such as the quality of scanning and image browsing also 
 will affect development of that market. 
  
 the technology is readily available but changing rapidly.  in this 
 context of rapid change, several factors affect quality and cost, to 
 which pob intends to pay particular attention, for example, the various 
 levels of resolution that can be achieved.  pob believes it can bring 
 resolution up to  dpi, but an interpolation process from  to  is 
 more likely.  the variation quality in microfilm will prove to be a 
 highly important factor.  pob may reexamine the standards used to film in 
 the first place by looking at this process as a followon to microfilming. 
  
 other important factors include  the techniques available to the 
 operator for handling material, the ways of integrating quality control 
 into the digitizing work flow, and a work flow that includes indexing and 
 storage.  pobs requirement was to be able to deal with quality control 
 at the point of scanning.  thus, thanks to xerox, pob anticipates having 
 a mechanism which will allow it not only to scan in batch form, but to 
 review the material as it goes through the scanner and control quality 
 from the outset. 
  
 the standards for measuring quality and costs depend greatly on the uses 
 of the material, including subsequent ocr, storage, printing, and 
 browsing.  but especially at issue for pob is the facility for browsing.  
 this facility, waters said, is perhaps the weakest aspect of imaging 
 technology and the most in need of development. 
  
 a variety of factors affect the usability of complex documents in image 
 form, among them  ) the ability of the system to handle the full range 
 of document types, not just monographs but serials, multipart 
 monographs, and manuscripts ) the location of the database of record 
 for bibliographic information about the image document, which pob wants 
 to enter once and in the most useful place, the online catalog ) a 
 document identifier for referencing the bibliographic information in one 
 place and the images in another ) the technique for making the basic 
 internal structure of the document accessible to the reader and finally, 
 ) the physical presentation on the crt of those documents.  pob is ready 
 to complete this phase now.  one last decision involves deciding which 
 material to scan. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  tiff files constitute de facto standard  naras experience 
 with image conversion software and text conversion  rfc   
 considerable flux concerning available hardware and software solutions  
 nal throughput rate during scanning  window management questions  
  
  
 in the questionandanswer period that followed waterss presentation, 
 the following points emerged 
  
       zidars statement about using tiff files as a standard meant de 
      facto standard.  this is what most people use and typically exchange 
      with other groups, across platforms, or even occasionally across 
      display software. 
  
       holmes commented on the unsuccessful experience of nara in 
      attempting to run imageconversion software or to exchange between 
      applications  what are supposedly tiff files go into other software 
      that is supposed to be able to accept tiff but cannot recognize the 
      format and cannot deal with it, and thus renders the exchange 
      useless.  re text conversion, he noted the different recognition 
      rates obtained by substituting the make and model of scanners in 
      naras recent test of an intelligent characterrecognition product 
      for a new company.  in the selection of hardware and software, 
      holmes argued, software no longer constitutes the overriding factor 
      it did until about a year ago rather it is perhaps important to 
      look at both now. 
  
       danny cohen and alan katz of the university of southern california 
      information sciences institute began circulating as an internet rfc 
      (rfc ) about a month ago a standard for a tiff interchange 
      format for internet distribution of monochrome bitmapped images, 
      which lynch said he believed would be used as a de facto standard. 
  
       fleischhauers impression from hearing these reports and thinking 
      about ams experience was that there is considerable flux concerning 
      available hardware and software solutions.  hooton agreed and 
      commented at the same time on zidars statement that the equipment 
      employed affects the results produced.  one cannot draw a complete 
      conclusion by saying it is difficult or impossible to perform ocr 
      from scanning microfilm, for example, with that device,  that set of 
      parameters, and system requirements, because numerous other people 
      are accomplishing just that, using other components, perhaps.  
      hooton opined that both the hardware and the software were highly 
      important.  most of the problems discussed today have been solved in 
      numerous different ways by other people.  though it is good to be 
      cognizant of various experiences, this is not to say that it will 
      always be thus. 
  
       at nal, the throughput rate of the scanning process for paper, 
      page by page, performing ocr, ranges from  to  pages per day 
      not performing ocr is considerably faster, although how much faster 
      is not known.  this is for scanning from bound books, which is much 
      slower. 
  
       waters commented on window management questions  dec proposed an 
      xwindows solution which was problematical for two reasons.  one was 
      pobs requirement to be able to manipulate images on the workstation 
      and bring them down to the workstation itself and the other was 
      network usage. 
  
                                   
  
  
 thoma  illustration of deficiencies in scanning and storage process  
 image quality in this process  different costs entailed by better image 
 quality  techniques for overcoming various deficiencies  fixed 
 thresholding, dynamic thresholding, dithering, image merge  page edge 
 effects     
  
  
 george thoma, chief, communications engineering branch, national library 
 of medicine (nlm), illustrated several of the deficiencies discussed by 
 the previous speakers.  he introduced the topic of special problems by 
 noting the advantages of electronic imaging.  for example, it is regenerable 
 because it is a coded file, and realtime quality control is possible with 
 electronic capture, whereas in photographic capture it is not. 
  
 one of the difficulties discussed in the scanning and storage process was 
 image quality which, without belaboring the obvious, means different 
 things for maps, medical xrays, or broadcast television.  in the case of 
 documents, thoma said, image quality boils down to legibility of the 
 textual parts, and fidelity in the case of gray or color photo printtype 
 material.  legibility boils down to scan density, the standard in most 
 cases being  dpi.  increasing the resolution with scanners that 
 perform  or  dpi, however, comes at a cost. 
  
 better image quality entails at least four different kinds of costs  ) 
 equipment costs, because the ccd (i.e., chargecouple device) with 
 greater number of elements costs more  ) time costs that translate to 
 the actual capture costs, because manual labor is involved (the time is 
 also dependent on the fact that more data has to be moved around in the 
 machine in the scanning or network devices that perform the scanning as 
 well as the storage)  ) media costs, because at high resolutions larger 
 files have to be stored and ) transmission costs, because there is just 
 more data to be transmitted. 
  
 but while resolution takes care of the issue of legibility in image 
 quality, other deficiencies have to do with contrast and elements on the 
 page scanned or the image that needed to be removed or clarified.  thus, 
 thoma proceeded to illustrate various deficiencies, how they are 
 manifested, and several techniques to overcome them. 
  
 fixed thresholding was the first technique described, suitable for 
 blackandwhite text, when the contrast does not vary over the page.  one 
 can have many different threshold levels in scanning devices.  thus, 
 thoma offered an example of extremely poor contrast, which resulted from 
 the fact that the stock was a heavy red.  this is the sort of image that 
 when microfilmed fails to provide any legibility whatsoever.  fixed 
 thresholding is the way to change the blacktored contrast to the 
 desired blacktowhite contrast. 
  
 other examples included material that had been browned or yellowed by 
 age.  this was also a case of contrast deficiency, and correction was 
 done by fixed thresholding.  a final example boils down to the same 
 thing, slight variability, but it is not significant.  fixed thresholding 
 solves this problem as well.  the microfilm equivalent is certainly legible, 
 but it comes with dark areas.  though thoma did not have a slide of the 
 microfilm in this case, he did show the reproduced electronic image. 
  
 when one has variable contrast over a page or the lighting over the page 
 area varies, especially in the case where a bound volume has light 
 shining on it, the image must be processed by a dynamic thresholding 
 scheme.  one scheme, dynamic averaging, allows the threshold level not to 
 be fixed but to be recomputed for every pixel from the neighboring 
 characteristics.  the neighbors of a pixel determine where the threshold 
 should be set for that pixel. 
  
 thoma showed an example of a page that had been made deficient by a 
 variety of techniques, including a burn mark, coffee stains, and a yellow 
 marker.  application of a fixedthresholding scheme, thoma argued, might 
 take care of several deficiencies on the page but not all of them.  
 performing the calculation for a dynamic threshold setting, however, 
 removes most of the deficiencies so that at least the text is legible. 
  
 another problem is representing a gray level with blackandwhite pixels 
 by a process known as dithering or electronic screening.  but dithering 
 does not provide good image quality for pure blackandwhite textual 
 material.  thoma illustrated this point with examples. although its 
 suitability for photoprint is the reason for electronic screening or 
 dithering, it cannot be used for every compound image.  in the document 
 that was distributed by cxp, thoma noticed that the dithered image of the 
 ieee test chart evinced some deterioration in the text.  he presented an 
 extreme example of deterioration in the text in which compounded 
 documents had to be set right by other techniques.  the technique 
 illustrated by the present example was an image merge in which the page 
 is scanned twice and the settings go from fixed threshold to the 
 dithering matrix the resulting images are merged to give the best 
 results with each technique. 
  
 thoma illustrated how dithering is also used in nonphotographic or 
 nonprint materials with an example of a grayish page from a medical text, 
 which was reproduced to show all of the gray that appeared in the 
 original.  dithering provided a reproduction of all the gray in the 
 original of another example from the same text. 
  
 thoma finally illustrated the problem of bordering, or pageedge, 
 effects.  books and bound volumes that are placed on a photocopy machine 
 or a scanner produce pageedge effects that are undesirable for two 
 reasons  ) the aesthetics of the image after all, if the image is to 
 be preserved, one does not necessarily want to keep all of its 
 deficiencies ) compression (with the bordering problem thoma 
 illustrated, the compression ratio deteriorated tremendously).  one way 
 to eliminate this more serious problem is to have the operator at the 
 point of scanning window the part of the image that is desirable and 
 automatically turn all of the pixels out of that picture to white.  
  
                                   
  
  
 fleischhauer  ams experience with scanning bound materials  dithering 
  
  
  
 carl fleischhauer, coordinator, american memory, library of congress, 
 reported ams experience with scanning bound materials, which he likened 
 to the problems involved in using photocopying machines.  very few 
 devices in the industry offer bookedge scanning, let alone book cradles.  
 the problem may be unsolvable, fleischhauer said, because a large enough 
 market does not exist for a preservationquality scanner.  am is using a 
 kurzweil scanner, which is a bookedge scanner now sold by xerox. 
  
 devoting the remainder of his brief presentation to dithering, 
 fleischhauer related ams experience with a contractor who was using 
 unsophisticated equipment and software to reduce moire patterns from 
 printed halftones.  am took the same image and used the dithering 
 algorithm that forms part of the same kurzweil xerox scanner it 
 disguised moire patterns much more effectively. 
  
 fleischhauer also observed that dithering produces a binary file which is 
 useful for numerous purposes, for example, printing it on a laser printer 
 without having to rehalftone it.  but it tends to defeat efficient 
 compression, because the very thing that dithers to reduce moire patterns 
 also tends to work against compression schemes.  am thought the 
 difference in image quality was worth it. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  relative use as a criterion for pobs selection of books to 
 be converted into digital form  
  
  
 during the discussion period, waters noted that one of the criteria for 
 selecting books among the , to be converted into digital image form 
 would be how much relative use they would receivea subject still 
 requiring evaluation.  the challenge will be to understand whether 
 coherent bodies of material will increase usage or whether pob should 
 seek material that is being used, scan that, and make it more accessible.  
 pob might decide to digitize materials that are already heavily used, in 
 order to make them more accessible and decrease wear on them.  another 
 approach would be to provide a large body of intellectually coherent 
 material that may be used more in digital form than it is currently used 
 in microfilm.  pob would seek material that was out of copyright. 
  
                                   
  
  
 baronas  origin and scope of aiim  types of documents produced in 
 aiims standards program  domain of aiims standardization work  aiims 
 structure  tc  and ms  electronic image management standards  
 categories of eim standardization where aiim standards are being 
 developed    
  
  
 jean baronas, senior manager, department of standards and technology, 
 association for information and image management (aiim), described the 
 notforprofit association and the national and international programs 
 for standardization in which aiim is active. 
  
 accredited for twentyfive years as the nations standards development 
 organization for document image management, aiim began life in a library 
 community developing microfilm standards.  today the association 
 maintains both its library and businessimage management standardization 
 activitiesand has moved into electronic imagemanagement 
 standardization (eim). 
  
 baronas defined the programs scope.  aiim deals with  ) the 
 terminology of standards and of the technology it uses ) methods of 
 measurement for the systems, as well as quality ) methodologies for 
 users to evaluate and measure quality ) the features of apparatus used 
 to manage and edit images and ) the procedures used to manage images. 
  
 baronas noted that three types of documents are produced in the aiim 
 standards program  the first two, accredited by the american national 
 standards institute (ansi), are standards and standard recommended 
 practices.  recommended practices differ from standards in that they 
 contain more tutorial information.  a technical report is not an ansi 
 standard.  because aiims policies and procedures for developing 
 standards are approved by ansi, its standards are labeled ansiaiim, 
 followed by the number and title of the standard. 
  
 baronas then illustrated the domain of aiims standardization work.  for 
 example, aiim is the administrator of the u.s. technical advisory group 
 (tag) to the international standards organizations (iso) technical 
 committee, tc ll micrographics and optical memories for document and 
 image recording, storage, and use.  aiim officially works through ansi in 
 the international standardization process. 
  
 baronas described aiims structure, including its board of directors, its 
 standards board of twelve individuals active in the imagemanagement 
 industry, its strategic planning and legal admissibility task forces, and 
 its national standards council, which is comprised of the members of a 
 number of organizations who vote on every aiim standard before it is 
 published.  baronas pointed out that aiims liaisons deal with numerous 
 other standards developers, including the optical disk community, office 
 and publishing systems, imagecodesandcharacter set committees, and the 
 national information standards organization (niso). 
  
 baronas illustrated the procedures of tc ll, which covers all aspects of 
 image management.  when aiims national program has conceptualized a new 
 project, it is usually submitted to the international level, so that the 
 member countries of tc ll can simultaneously work on the development of 
 the standard or the technical report.  baronas also illustrated a classic 
 microfilm standard, ms, which deals with numerous imaging concepts that 
 apply to electronic imaging.  originally developed in the ls, revised 
 in the ls, and revised again in l, this standard is scheduled for 
 another revision.  ms is an active standard whereby users may propose 
 new density ranges and new methods of evaluating film images in the 
 standards revision. 
  
 baronas detailed several electronic imagemanagement standards, for 
 instance, ansiaiim ms, a qualitycontrol guideline for scanning . 
 by  blackandwhite office documents.  this standard is used with the 
 ieee fax imagea continuous tone photographic image with gray scales, 
 text, and several continuous tone picturesand aiim test target number 
 , a representative document used in office document management. 
  
 baronas next outlined the four categories of eim standardization in which 
 aiim standards are being developed  transfer and retrieval, evaluation, 
 optical disc and document scanning applications, and design and 
 conversion of documents.  she detailed several of the main projects of 
 each  ) in the category of image transfer and retrieval, a bilevel 
 image transfer format, ansiaiim ms, which is a proposed standard that 
 describes a file header for image transfer between unlike systems when 
 the images are compressed using g and g compression ) the category of 
 image evaluation, which includes the aiimproposed tr tutorial on image 
 resolution (this technical report will treat the differences and 
 similarities between classical or photographic and electronic imaging) 
 ) design and conversion, which includes a proposed technical report 
 called forms design optimization for eim (this report considers how 
 generalpurpose business forms can be best designed so that scanning is 
 optimized reprographic characteristics such as type, rules, background, 
 tint, and color will likewise be treated in the technical report) ) 
 disk and document scanning applications includes a project a) on planning 
 platters and disk management, b) on generating an application profile for 
 eim when images are stored and distributed on cdrom, and c) on 
 evaluating scsi, and how a common command set can be generated for scsi 
 so that document scanners are more easily integrated.  (ansiaiim ms 
 will also apply to compressed images.) 
  
                                   
  
  
 battin  the implications of standards for preservation  a major 
 obstacle to successful cooperation  a hindrance to access in the digital 
 environment  standards a doubleedged sword for those concerned with the 
 preservation of the human record  nearterm prognosis for reliable 
 archival standards  preservation concerns for electronic media  need 
 for reconceptualizing our preservation principles  standards in the real 
 world and the politics of reproduction  need to redefine the concept of 
 archival and to begin to think in terms of life cycles  cooperation and 
 the la guardia eight  concerns generated by discussions on the problems 
 of preserving text and image  general principles to be adopted in a 
 world without standards  
  
  
 patricia battin, president, the commission on preservation and access 
 (cpa), addressed the implications of standards for preservation.  she 
 listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world of 
 the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past hundred 
 yearsfor example, in bibliographic formats, binding standards, and, most 
 important, in determining what constitutes longevity or archival quality. 
  
 although standards have lightened the preservation burden through the 
 development of national and international collaborative programs, 
 nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other peoples standards remains a 
 major obstacle to successful cooperation, battin said. 
  
 the zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered 
 rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital 
 environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically 
 just reward. 
  
 battin argued that standards are a doubleedged sword for those concerned 
 with the preservation of the human record, that is, the provision of 
 access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media as far into the 
 future as possible.  standards are essential to facilitate 
 interconnectivity and access, but, battin said, as lynch pointed out 
 yesterday, if set too soon they can hinder creativity, expansion of 
 capability, and the broadening of access.  the characteristics of 
 standards for digital imagery differ radically from those for analog 
 imagery.  and the nature of digital technology implies continuing 
 volatility and change.  to reiterate, precipitous standardsetting can 
 inhibit creativity, but delayed standardsetting results in chaos. 
  
 since in battins opinion the nearterm prognosis for reliable archival 
 standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor, two 
 alternatives remain  standing pat with the old technology, or 
 reconceptualizing. 
  
 preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general domains.  
 one is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally 
 generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.  this 
 domain contains several subdivisions, including ) the closed, 
 proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information such 
 as electronic journals and government agency records, and electronically 
 produced or captured raw data and ) the application of digital 
 technologies to the reformatting of materials originally published on a 
 deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or videotape. 
  
 the preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing of our 
 preservation principles during a volatile, standardless transition which 
 may last far longer than any of us envision today.  battin urged the 
 necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring, and setting 
 standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of managing 
 continuing access to information stored on a variety of media and 
 requiring a variety of everchanging hardware and software for accessa 
 fundamental shift for the library profession. 
  
 battin offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable confidence 
 in a world without standards.  her comments fell roughly into two sections 
 ) standards in the real world and ) the politics of reproduction. 
  
 in regard to realworld standards, battin argued the need to redefine the 
 concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.  in 
 the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced a 
 cavalier attitude toward life cycles.  the transient nature of the 
 electronic media has compelled people to recognize and accept upfront the 
 concept of life cycles in place of permanency. 
  
 digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context 
 to ensure efficient exchange of information.  moreover, during this 
 transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts such as 
 backup copies and archival copies in the cxp are defined is necessary, 
 or the opportunity to move forward will be lost. 
  
 in terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting, battin 
 also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different 
 directions.  the cpa has catalyzed a small group of universities called 
 the la guardia eightbecause la guardia airport is where meetings take 
 placeharvard, yale, cornell, princeton, penn state, tennessee, 
 stanford, and usc, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look 
 at all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along, 
 instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.  continuing 
 to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital 
 environment, battin said, will effectively lead to forfeiture of the 
 benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship. 
  
 under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, battin reiterated 
 an oftmade argument concerning the electronic library, namely, that it 
 is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere is that belief 
 expressed more dramatically than in the conversion of brittle books to 
 new media.  preserving information published in electronic media involves 
 making sure the information remains accessible and that digital 
 information is not lost through reproduction.  in the analog world of 
 photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity to the original becomes 
 paramount, as do issues of whose fidelity and whose original 
  
 battin elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent study 
 conducted by the cpa on the problems of preserving text and image.  
 discussions with scholars, librarians, and curators in a variety of 
 disciplines dependent on text and image generated a variety of concerns, 
 for example  ) copy what is, not what the technology is capable of.  
 this is very important for the history of ideas.  scholars wish to know 
 what the author saw and worked from.  and make available at the 
 workstation the opportunity to erase all the defects and enhance the 
 presentation.  ) the fidelity of reproductionwhat is good enough, what 
 can we afford, and the difference it makesissues of subjective versus 
 objective resolution.  ) the differences between primary and secondary 
 users.  restricting the definition of primary user to the one in whose 
 discipline the material has been published runs one headlong into the 
 reality that these printed books have had a host of other users from a 
 host of other disciplines, who not only were looking for very different 
 things, but who also shared values very different from those of the 
 primary user.  ) the relationship of the standard of reproduction to new 
 capabilities of scholarshipthe browsing standard versus an archival 
 standard.  how good must the archival standard be  can a distinction be 
 drawn between potential users in setting standards for reproduction  
 archival storage, use copies, browsing copiesought an attempt to set 
 standards even be made  ) finally, costs.  how much are we prepared to 
 pay to capture absolute fidelity  what are the tradeoffs between vastly 
 enhanced access, degrees of fidelity, and costs 
  
 these standards, battin concluded, serve to complicate further the 
 reproduction process, and add to the long list of technical standards 
 that are necessary to ensure widespread access.  ways to articulate and 
 analyze the costs that are attached to the different levels of standards 
 must be found. 
  
 given the chaos concerning standards, which promises to linger for the 
 foreseeable future, battin urged adoption of the following general 
 principles 
  
       strive to understand the changing information requirements of 
      scholarly disciplines as more and more technology is integrated into 
      the process of research and scholarly communication in order to meet 
      future scholarly needs, not to build for the past.  capture 
      deteriorating information at the highest affordable resolution, even 
      though the dissemination and display technologies will lag. 
  
       develop cooperative mechanisms to foster agreement on protocols 
      for document structure and other interchange mechanisms necessary 
      for widespread dissemination and use before official standards are 
      set. 
  
       accept that, in a transition period, de facto standards will have 
      to be developed. 
  
       capture information in a way that keeps all options open and 
      provides for total convertibility  ocr, scanning of microfilm, 
      producing microfilm from scanned documents, etc. 
  
       work closely with the generators of information and the builders 
      of networks and databases to ensure that continuing accessibility is 
      a primary concern from the beginning. 
  
       piggyback on standards under development for the broad market, and 
      avoid libraryspecific standards work with the vendors, in order to 
      take advantage of that which is being standardized for the rest of 
      the world. 
  
       concentrate efforts on managing permanence in the digital world, 
      rather than perfecting the longevity of a particular medium. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  additional comments on tiff  
  
  
 during the brief discussion period that followed battins presentation, 
 baronas explained that tiff was not developed in collaboration with or 
 under the auspices of aiim.  tiff is a company product, not a standard, 
 is owned by two corporations, and is always changing.  baronas also 
 observed that ansiaiim ms, a bilevel image file transfer format that 
 allows unlike systems to exchange images, is compatible with tiff as well 
 as with decs architecture and ibms modcaioca. 
  
                                   
  
  
 hooton  several questions to be considered in discussing text conversion 
  
  
  
 hooton introduced the final topic, text conversion, by noting that it is 
 becoming an increasingly important part of the imaging business.  many 
 people now realize that it enhances their system to be able to have more 
 and more character data as part of their imaging system.  re the issue of 
 ocr versus rekeying, hooton posed several questions  how does one get 
 text into computerreadable form  does one use automated processes  
 does one attempt to eliminate the use of operators where possible  
 standards for accuracy, he said, are extremely important  it makes a 
 major difference in cost and time whether one sets as a standard . 
 percent acceptance or . percent.  he mentioned outsourcing as a 
 possibility for converting text.  finally, what one does with the image 
 to prepare it for the recognition process is also important, he said, 
 because such preparation changes how recognition is viewed, as well as 
 facilitates recognition itself. 
  
                                   
  
  
 lesk  roles of participants in core  data flow  the scanning process  
 the image interface  results of experiments involving the use of 
 electronic resources and traditional paper copies  testing the issue of 
 serendipity  conclusions  
  
  
 michael lesk, executive director, computer science research, bell 
 communications research, inc. (bellcore), discussed the chemical online 
 retrieval experiment (core), a cooperative project involving cornell 
 university, oclc, bellcore, and the american chemical society (acs). 
  
 lesk spoke on ) how the scanning was performed, including the unusual 
 feature of page segmentation, and ) the use made of the text and the 
 image in experiments. 
  
 working with the chemistry journals (because acs has been saving its 
 typesetting tapes since the mids and thus has a significant backrun 
 of the most important chemistry journals in the united states), core is 
 attempting to create an automated chemical library.  approximately a 
 quarter of the pages by square inch are made up of images of 
 quasipictorial material dealing with the graphic components of the 
 pages is extremely important.  lesk described the roles of participants 
 in core  ) acs provides copyright permission, journals on paper, 
 journals on microfilm, and some of the definitions of the files ) at 
 bellcore, lesk chiefly performs the data preparation, while dennis egan 
 performs experiments on the users of chemical abstracts, and supplies the 
 indexing and numerous magnetic tapes  ) cornell provides the site of the 
 experiment ) oclc develops retrieval software and other user interfaces. 
 various manufacturers and publishers have furnished other help. 
  
 concerning data flow, bellcore receives microfilm and paper from acs the 
 microfilm is scanned by outside vendors, while the paper is scanned 
 inhouse on an improvision scanner, twenty pages per minute at  dpi, 
 which provides sufficient quality for all practical uses.  lesk would 
 prefer to have more gray level, because one of the acs journals prints on 
 some colored pages, which creates a problem. 
  
 bellcore performs all this scanning, creates a pageimage file, and also 
 selects from the pages the graphics, to mix with the text file (which is 
 discussed later in the workshop).  the user is always searching the ascii 
 file, but she or he may see a display based on the ascii or a display 
 based on the images. 
  
 lesk illustrated how the program performs page analysis, and the image 
 interface.  (the user types several words, is presented with a list 
 usually of the titles of articles contained in an issuethat derives 
 from the ascii, clicks on an icon and receives an image that mirrors an 
 acs page.)  lesk also illustrated an alternative interface, based on text 
 on the ascii, the socalled superbook interface from bellcore. 
  
 lesk next presented the results of an experiment conducted by dennis egan 
 and involving thirtysix students at cornell, one third of them 
 undergraduate chemistry majors, one third senior undergraduate chemistry 
 majors, and one third graduate chemistry students.  a third of them 
 received the paper journals, the traditional paper copies and chemical 
 abstracts on paper.  a third received image displays of the pictures of 
 the pages, and a third received the text display with popup graphics. 
  
 the students were given several questions made up by some chemistry 
 professors.  the questions fell into five classes, ranging from very easy 
 to very difficult, and included questions designed to simulate browsing 
 as well as a traditional information retrievaltype task. 
  
 lesk furnished the following results.  in the straightforward question 
 searchthe question being, what is the phosphorus oxygen bond distance 
 and hydroxy phosphatethe students were told that they could take 
 fifteen minutes and, then, if they wished, give up.  the students with 
 paper took more than fifteen minutes on average, and yet most of them 
 gave up.  the students with either electronic format, text or image, 
 received good scores in reasonable time, hardly ever had to give up, and 
 usually found the right answer. 
  
 in the browsing study, the students were given a list of eight topics, 
 told to imagine that an issue of the journal of the american chemical 
 society had just appeared on their desks, and were also told to flip 
 through it and to find topics mentioned in the issue.  the average scores 
 were about the same.  (the students were told to answer yes or no about 
 whether or not particular topics appeared.)  the errors, however, were 
 quite different.  the students with paper rarely said that something 
 appeared when it had not.  but they often failed to find something 
 actually mentioned in the issue.  the computer people found numerous 
 things, but they also frequently said that a topic was mentioned when it 
 was not.  (the reason, of course, was that they were performing word 
 searches.  they were finding that words were mentioned and they were 
 concluding that they had accomplished their task.) 
  
 this question also contained a trick to test the issue of serendipity.  
 the students were given another list of eight topics and instructed, 
 without taking a second look at the journal, to recall how many of this 
 new list of eight topics were in this particular issue.  this was an 
 attempt to see if they performed better at remembering what they were not 
 looking for.  they all performed about the same, paper or electronics, 
 about  percent accurate.  in short, lesk said, people were not very 
 good when it came to serendipity, but they were no worse at it with 
 computers than they were with paper. 
  
 (lesk gave a parenthetical illustration of the learning curve of students 
 who used superbook.) 
  
 the students using the electronic systems started off worse than the ones 
 using print, but by the third of the three sessions in the series had 
 caught up to print.  as one might expect, electronics provide a much 
 better means of finding what one wants to read reading speeds, once the 
 object of the search has been found, are about the same. 
  
 almost none of the students could perform the hard taskthe analogous 
 transformation.  (it would require the expertise of organic chemists to 
 complete.)  but an interesting result was that the students using the text 
 search performed terribly, while those using the image system did best. 
 that the text search system is driven by text offers the explanation. 
 everything is focused on the text to see the pictures, one must press 
 on an icon.  many students found the right article containing the answer 
 to the question, but they did not click on the icon to bring up the right 
 figure and see it.  they did not know that they had found the right place, 
 and thus got it wrong. 
  
 the short answer demonstrated by this experiment was that in the event 
 one does not know what to read, one needs the electronic systems the 
 electronic systems hold no advantage at the moment if one knows what to 
 read, but neither do they impose a penalty. 
  
 lesk concluded by commenting that, on one hand, the image system was easy 
 to use.  on the other hand, the text display system, which represented 
 twenty manyears of work in programming and polishing, was not winning, 
 because the text was not being read, just searched.  the much easier 
 system is highly competitive as well as remarkably effective for the 
 actual chemists. 
  
                                   
  
  
 erway  most challenging aspect of working on am  assumptions guiding 
 ams approach  testing different types of service bureaus  ams 
 requirement for . percent accuracy  requirements for textcoding  
 additional factors influencing ams approach to coding  results of ams 
 experience with rekeying  other problems in dealing with service bureaus 
  quality control the most timeconsuming aspect of contracting out 
 conversion  longterm outlook uncertain  
  
  
 to ricky erway, associate coordinator, american memory, library of 
 congress, the constant variety of conversion projects taking place 
 simultaneously represented perhaps the most challenging aspect of working 
 on am.  thus, the challenge was not to find a solution for text 
 conversion but a tool kit of solutions to apply to lcs varied 
 collections that need to be converted.  erway limited her remarks to the 
 process of converting text to machinereadable form, and the variety of 
 lcs text collections, for example, bound volumes, microfilm, and 
 handwritten manuscripts. 
  
 two assumptions have guided ams approach, erway said  ) a desire not 
 to perform the conversion inhouse.  because of the variety of formats and 
 types of texts, to capitalize the equipment and have the talents and 
 skills to operate them at lc would be extremely expensive.  further, the 
 natural inclination to upgrade to newer and better equipment each year 
 made it reasonable for am to focus on what it did best and seek external 
 conversion services.  using service bureaus also allowed am to have 
 several types of operations take place at the same time.  ) am was not a 
 technology project, but an effort to improve access to library 
 collections.  hence, whether text was converted using ocr or rekeying 
 mattered little to am.  what mattered were cost and accuracy of results. 
  
 am considered different types of service bureaus and selected three to 
 perform several small tests in order to acquire a sense of the field.  
 the sample collections with which they worked included handwritten 
 correspondence, typewritten manuscripts from the s, and 
 eighteenthcentury printed broadsides on microfilm.  on none of these 
 samples was ocr performed they were all rekeyed.  am had several special 
 requirements for the three service bureaus it had engaged.  for instance, 
 any errors in the original text were to be retained.  working from bound 
 volumes or anything that could not be sheetfed also constituted a factor 
 eliminating companies that would have performed ocr. 
  
 am requires . percent accuracy, which, though it sounds high, often 
 means one or two errors per page.  the initial batch of test samples 
 contained several handwritten materials for which am did not require 
 textcoding.  the results, erway reported, were in all cases fairly 
 comparable  for the most part, all three service bureaus achieved . 
 percent accuracy.  am was satisfied with the work but surprised at the cost. 
  
 as am began converting whole collections, it retained the requirement for 
 . percent accuracy and added requirements for textcoding.  am needed 
 to begin performing work more than three years ago before lc requirements 
 for sgml applications had been established.  since ams goal was simply 
 to retain any of the intellectual content represented by the formatting 
 of the document (which would be lost if one performed a straight ascii 
 conversion), am used sgmllike codes.  these codes resembled sgml tags 
 but were used without the benefit of documenttype definitions.  am found 
 that many service bureaus were not yet sgmlproficient. 
  
 additional factors influencing the approach am took with respect to 
 coding included  ) the inability of any known microcomputerbased 
 userretrieval software to take advantage of sgml coding and ) the 
 multiple inconsistencies in format of the older documents, which 
 confirmed am in its desire not to attempt to force the different formats 
 to conform to a single documenttype definition (dtd) and thus create the 
 need for a separate dtd for each document.  
  
 the five text collections that am has converted or is in the process of 
 converting include a collection of eighteenthcentury broadsides, a 
 collection of pamphlets, two typescript document collections, and a 
 collection of  books. 
  
 erway next reviewed the results of ams experience with rekeying, noting 
 again that because the bulk of ams materials are historical, the quality 
 of the text often does not lend itself to ocr.  while nonenglish 
 speakers are less likely to guess or elaborate or correct typos in the 
 original text, they are also less able to infer what we would they also 
 are nearly incapable of converting handwritten text.  another 
 disadvantage of working with overseas keyers is that they are much less 
 likely to telephone with questions, especially on the coding, with the 
 result that they develop their own rules as they encounter new 
 situations. 
  
 government contracting procedures and time frames posed a major challenge 
 to performing the conversion.  many service bureaus are not accustomed to 
 retaining the image, even if they perform ocr.  thus, questions of image 
 format and storage media were somewhat novel to many of them.  erway also 
 remarked other problems in dealing with service bureaus, for example, 
 their inability to perform text conversion from the kind of microfilm 
 that lc uses for preservation purposes. 
  
 but quality control, in erways experience, was the most timeconsuming 
 aspect of contracting out conversion.  am has been attempting to perform 
 a percent quality review, looking at either every tenth document or 
 every tenth page to make certain that the service bureaus are maintaining 
 . percent accuracy.  but even if they are complying with the 
 requirement for accuracy, finding errors produces a desire to correct 
 them and, in turn, to clean up the whole collection, which defeats the 
 purpose to some extent.  even a double entry requires a 
 characterbycharacter comparison to the original to meet the accuracy 
 requirement.  lc is not accustomed to publish imperfect texts, which 
 makes attempting to deal with the industry standard an emotionally 
 fraught issue for am.  as was mentioned in the previous days discussion, 
 going from . to . percent accuracy usually doubles costs and 
 means a third keying or another complete runthrough of the text. 
  
 although am has learned much from its experiences with various collections 
 and various service bureaus, erway concluded pessimistically that no 
 breakthrough has been achieved.   incremental improvements have occurred 
 in some of the ocr technology, some of the processes, and some of the 
 standards acceptances, which, though they may lead to somewhat lower costs, 
 do not offer much encouragement to many people who are anxiously awaiting 
 the day that the entire contents of lc are available online. 
  
                                   
  
  
 zidar  several answers to why one attempts to perform fulltext 
 conversion  per page cost of performing ocr  typical problems 
 encountered during editing  editing poor copy ocr vs. rekeying  
  
  
 judith zidar, coordinator, national agricultural text digitizing program 
 (natdp), national agricultural library (nal), offered several answers to 
 the question of why one attempts to perform fulltext conversion  ) 
 text in an image can be read by a human but not by a computer, so of 
 course it is not searchable and there is not much one can do with it.  ) 
 some material simply requires wordlevel access.  for instance, the legal 
 profession insists on fulltext access to its material with taxonomic or 
 geographic material, which entails numerous names, one virtually requires 
 wordlevel access.  ) full text permits rapid browsing and searching, 
 something that cannot be achieved in an image with todays technology.  
 ) text stored as ascii and delivered in ascii is standardized and highly 
 portable.  ) people just want fulltext searching, even those who do not 
 know how to do it.  nal, for the most part, is performing ocr at an 
 actual cost per averagesize page of approximately .  nal scans the 
 page to create the electronic image and passes it through the ocr device. 
  
 zidar next rehearsed several typical problems encountered during editing.  
 praising the celerity of her student workers, zidar observed that editing 
 requires approximately five to ten minutes per page, assuming that there 
 are no large tables to audit.  confusion among the three characters i, ,  
 and l, constitutes perhaps the most common problem encountered.  zeroes 
 and  os also are  frequently confused.  double ms create a particular 
 problem, even on clean pages.  they are so wide in most fonts that they 
 touch, and the system simply cannot tell where one letter ends and the 
 other begins.  complex page formats occasionally fail to columnate 
 properly, which entails rescanning as though one were working with a 
 single column, entering the ascii, and decolumnating for better 
 searching.  with proportionally spaced text, ocr can have difficulty 
 discerning what is a space and what are merely spaces between letters, as 
 opposed to spaces between words, and therefore will merge text or break 
 up words where it should not. 
  
 zidar said that it can often take longer to edit a poorcopy ocr than to 
 key it from scratch.  nal has also experimented with partial editing of 
 text, whereby project workers go into and clean up the format, removing 
 stray characters but not running a spellcheck.  nal corrects typos in 
 the title and authors names, which provides a foothold for searching and 
 browsing.  even extremely poorquality ocr (e.g., percent accuracy) 
 can still be searched, because numerous words are correct, while the 
 important words are probably repeated often enough that they are likely 
 to be found correct somewhere.  librarians, however, cannot tolerate this 
 situation, though end users seem more willing to use this text for 
 searching, provided that nal indicates that it is unedited.  zidar 
 concluded that rekeying of text may be the best route to take, in spite 
 of numerous problems with quality control and cost. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  modifying an image before performing ocr  nals costs per 
 page ams costs per page and experience with federal prison industries  
 elements comprising natdps costs per page  ocr and structured markup  
 distinction between the structure of a document and its representation 
 when put on the screen or printed  
  
  
 hooton prefaced the lengthy discussion that followed with several 
 comments about modifying an image before one reaches the point of 
 performing ocr.  for example, in regard to an application containing a 
 significant amount of redundant data, such as formtype data, numerous 
 companies today are working on various kinds of form renewal, prior to 
 going through a recognition process, by using dropout colors.  thus, 
 acquiring access to form design or using electronic means are worth 
 considering.  hooton also noted that conversion usually makes or breaks 
 ones imaging system.  it is extremely important, extremely costly in 
 terms of either capital investment or service, and determines the quality 
 of the remainder of ones system, because it determines the character of 
 the raw material used by the system. 
  
 concerning the four projects undertaken by nal, two inside and two 
 performed by outside contractors, zidar revealed that an inhouse service 
 bureau executed the first at a cost between  and  per page for 
 everything, including building of the database.  the project undertaken 
 by the consultative group on international agricultural research (cgiar) 
 cost approximately  per page for the conversion, plus some expenses 
 for the software and building of the database.  the acid rain projecta 
 twodisk set produced by the university of vermont, consisting of 
 canadian publications on acid raincost . per page for everything, 
 including keying of the text, which was double keyed, scanning of the 
 images, and building of the database.  the inhouse project offered 
 considerable ease of convenience and greater control of the process.  on 
 the other hand, the service bureaus know their job and perform it 
 expeditiously, because they have more people. 
  
 as a useful comparison, erway revealed ams costs as follows  . 
 cents to . cents per thousand characters, with an average page 
 containing , characters.  requirements for coding and imaging 
 increase the costs.  thus, conversion of the text, including the coding, 
 costs approximately  per page.  (this figure does not include the 
 imaging and databasebuilding included in the nal costs.)  am also 
 enjoyed a happy experience with federal prison industries, which 
 precluded the necessity of going through the requestforproposal process 
 to award a contract, because it is another government agency.  the 
 prisoners performed ams rekeying just as well as other service bureaus 
 and proved handy as well.  am shipped them the books, which they would 
 photocopy on a bookedge scanner.  they would perform the markup on 
 photocopies, return the books as soon as they were done with them, 
 perform the keying, and return the material to am on worm disks. 
  
 zidar detailed the elements that constitute the previously noted cost of 
 approximately  per page.  most significant is the editing, correction 
 of errors, and spellcheckings, which though they may sound easy to 
 perform require, in fact, a great deal of time.  reformatting text also 
 takes a while, but a significant amount of nals expenses are for equipment, 
 which was extremely expensive when purchased because it was one of the few 
 systems on the market.  the costs of equipment are being amortized over 
 five years but are still quite high, nearly , per month. 
  
 hockey raised a general question concerning ocr and the amount of editing 
 required (substantial in her experience) to generate the kind of 
 structured markup necessary for manipulating the text on the computer or 
 loading it into any retrieval system.  she wondered if the speakers could 
 extend the previous question about the costbenefit of adding or exerting 
 structured markup.  erway noted that several ocr systems retain italics, 
 bolding, and other spatial formatting.  while the material may not be in 
 the format desired, these systems possess the ability to remove the 
 original materials quickly from the hands of the people performing the 
 conversion, as well as to retain that information so that users can work 
 with it.  hockey rejoined that the current thinking on markup is that one 
 should not say that something is italic or bold so much as why it is that 
 way.  to be sure, one needs to know that something was italicized, but 
 how can one get from one to the other  one can map from the structure to 
 the typographic representation. 
  
 fleischhauer suggested that, given the  million items the library 
 holds, it may not be possible for lc to do more than report that a thing 
 was in italics as opposed to why it was italics, although that may be 
 desirable in some contexts.  promising to talk a bit during the afternoon 
 session about several experiments oclc performed on automatic recognition 
 of document elements, and which they hoped to extend, weibel said that in 
 fact one can recognize the major elements of a document with a fairly 
 high degree of reliability, at least as good as ocr.  stevens drew a 
 useful distinction between standard, generalized markup (i.e., defining 
 for a documenttype definition the structure of the document), and what 
 he termed a style sheet, which had to do with italics, bolding, and other 
 forms of emphasis.  thus, two different components are at work, one being 
 the structure of the document itself (its logic), and the other being its 
 representation when it is put on the screen or printed. 
  
                                   
  
 session v.  approaches to preparing electronic texts 
  
  
 hockey  text in ascii and the representation of electronic text versus 
 an image  the need to look at ways of using markup to assist retrieval  
 the need for an encoding format that will be reusable and multifunctional 
  
  
 susan hockey, director, center for electronic texts in the humanities 
 (ceth), rutgers and princeton universities, announced that one talk 
 (weibels) was moved into this session from the morning and that david 
 packard was unable to attend.  the session would attempt to focus more on 
 what one can do with a text in ascii and the representation of electronic 
 text rather than just an image, what one can do with a computer that 
 cannot be done with a book or an image.  it would be argued that one can 
 do much more than just read a text, and from that starting point one can 
 use markup and methods of preparing the text to take full advantage of 
 the capability of the computer.  that would lead to a discussion of what 
 the european community calls reusability, what may better be termed 
 durability, that is, how to prepare or make a text that will last a long 
 time and that can be used for as many applications as possible, which 
 would lead to issues of improving intellectual access. 
  
 hockey urged the need to look at ways of using markup to facilitate retrieval, 
 not just for referencing or to help locate an item that is retrieved, but also to put markup tags in 
 a text to help retrieve the thing sought either with linguistic tagging or 
 interpretation.  hockey also argued that little advancement had occurred in 
 the software tools currently available for retrieving and searching text. 
 she pressed the desideratum of going beyond boolean searches and performing 
 more sophisticated searching, which the insertion of more markup in the text 
 would facilitate.  thinking about electronic texts as opposed to images means 
 considering material that will never appear in print form, or print will not 
 be its primary form, that is, material which only appears in electronic form. 
 hockey alluded to the history and the need for markup and tagging and 
 electronic text, which was developed through the use of computers in the 
 humanities as michelson had observed, father busa had started in  
 to prepare the firstever text on the computer. 
  
 hockey remarked several large projects, particularly in europe, for the 
 compilation of dictionaries, language studies, and language analysis, in 
 which people have built up archives of text and have begun to recognize 
 the need for an encoding format that will be reusable and multifunctional, 
 that can be used not just to print the text, which may be assumed to be a 
 byproduct of what one wants to do, but to structure it inside the computer 
 so that it can be searched, built into a hypertext system, etc. 
  
                                   
  
  
 weibel  oclcs approach to preparing electronic text  retroconversion, 
 keying of texts, more automated ways of developing data  project adapt 
 and the core project  intelligent character recognition does not exist  
 advantages of sgml  data should be free of procedural markup 
 descriptive markup strongly advocated  oclcs interface illustrated  
 storage requirements and costs for putting a lot of information on line  
  
  
 stuart weibel, senior research scientist, online computer library center, 
 inc. (oclc), described oclcs approach to preparing electronic text.  he 
 argued that the electronic world into which we are moving must 
 accommodate not only the future but the past as well, and to some degree 
 even the present.  thus, starting out at one end with retroconversion and 
 keying of texts, one would like to move toward much more automated ways 
 of developing data. 
  
 for example, project adapt had to do with automatically converting 
 document images into a structured document database with ocr text as 
 indexing and also a little bit of automatic formatting and tagging of 
 that text.  the core project hosted by cornell university, bellcore, 
 oclc, the american chemical society, and chemical abstracts, constitutes 
 weibels principal concern at the moment.  this project is an example of 
 converting text for which one already has a machinereadable version into 
 a format more suitable for electronic delivery and database searching.  
 (since michael lesk had previously described core, weibel would say 
 little concerning it.)  borrowing a chemical phrase, de novo synthesis, 
 weibel cited the online journal of current clinical trials as an example 
 of de novo electronic publishing, that is, a form in which the primary 
 form of the information is electronic. 
  
 project adapt, then, which oclc completed a couple of years ago and in 
 fact is about to resume, is a model in which one takes page images either 
 in paper or microfilm and converts them automatically to a searchable 
 electronic database, either online or local.  the operating assumption 
 is that accepting some blemishes in the data, especially for 
 retroconversion of materials, will make it possible to accomplish more.  
 not enough money is available to support perfect conversion. 
  
 weibel related several steps taken to perform image preprocessing 
 (processing on the image before performing optical character 
 recognition), as well as image postprocessing.  he denied the existence 
 of intelligent character recognition and asserted that what is wanted is 
 page recognition, which is a long way off.  oclc has experimented with 
 merging of multiple optical character recognition systems that will 
 reduce errors from an unacceptable rate of  characters out of every 
 l, to an unacceptable rate of  characters out of every l,, but it 
 is not good enough.  it will never be perfect. 
  
 concerning the core project, weibel observed that bellcore is taking the 
 topography files, extracting the page images, and converting those 
 topography files to sgml markup.  lesk hands that data off to oclc, which 
 builds that data into a newton database, the same system that underlies 
 the online system in virtually all of the reference products at oclc.  
 the longterm goal is to make the systems interoperable so that not just 
 bellcores system and oclcs system can access this data, but other 
 systems can as well, and the key to that is the z. common command 
 language and the fulltext extension.  z. is fine for marc records, 
 but is not enough to do it for full text (that is, make full texts 
 interoperable). 
  
 weibel next outlined the critical role of sgml for a variety of purposes, 
 for example, as noted by hockey, in the world of extremely large 
 databases, using highly structured data to perform field searches.  
 weibel argued that by building the structure of the data in (i.e., the 
 structure of the data originally on a printed page), it becomes easy to 
 look at a journal article even if one cannot read the characters and know 
 where the title or author is, or what the sections of that document would be. 
 oclc wants to make that structure explicit in the database, because it will 
 be important for retrieval purposes. 
  
 the second big advantage of sgml is that it gives one the ability to 
 build structure into the database that can be used for display purposes 
 without contaminating the data with instructions about how to format 
 things.  the distinction lies between procedural markup, which tells one 
 where to put dots on the page, and descriptive markup, which describes 
 the elements of a document. 
  
 weibel believes that there should be no procedural markup in the data at 
 all, that the data should be completely unsullied by information about 
 italics or boldness.  that should be left up to the display device, 
 whether that display device is a page printer or a screen display device.  
 by keeping ones database free of that kind of contamination, one can 
 make decisions down the road, for example, reorganize the data in ways 
 that are not cramped by builtin notions of what should be italic and 
 what should be bold.  weibel strongly advocated descriptive markup.  as 
 an example, he illustrated the index structure in the core data.  with 
 subsequent illustrated examples of markup, weibel acknowledged the common 
 complaint that sgml is hard to read in its native form, although markup 
 decreases considerably once one gets into the body.  without the markup, 
 however, one would not have the structure in the data.  one can pass 
 markup through a latex processor and convert it relatively easily to a 
 printed version of the document. 
  
 weibel next illustrated an extremely cluttered screen dump of oclcs 
 system, in order to show as much as possible the inherent capability on 
 the screen.  (he noted parenthetically that he had become a supporter of 
 xwindows as a result of the progress of the core project.)  weibel also 
 illustrated the two major parts of the interface  l) a control box that 
 allows one to generate lists of items, which resembles a small table of 
 contents based on key words one wishes to search, and ) a document 
 viewer, which is a separate process in and of itself.  he demonstrated 
 how to follow links through the electronic database simply by selecting 
 the appropriate button and bringing them up.  he also noted problems that 
 remain to be accommodated in the interface (e.g., as pointed out by lesk, 
 what happens when users do not click on the icon for the figure). 
  
 given the constraints of time, weibel omitted a large number of ancillary 
 items in order to say a few words concerning storage requirements and 
 what will be required to put a lot of things on line.  since it is 
 extremely expensive to reconvert all of this data, especially if it is 
 just in paper form (and even if it is in electronic form in typesetting 
 tapes), he advocated building journals electronically from the start.  in 
 that case, if one only has text graphics and indexing (which is all that 
 one needs with de novo electronic publishing, because there is no need to 
 go back and look at bitmaps of pages), one can get , journals of 
 full text, or almost  million pages per year.  these pages can be put in 
 approximately  gigabytes of storage, which is not all that much, 
 weibel said.  for twenty years, something less than three terabytes would 
 be required.  weibel calculated the costs of storing this information as 
 follows  if a gigabyte costs approximately ,, then a terabyte costs 
 approximately  million to buy in terms of hardware.  one also needs a 
 building to put it in and a staff like oclc to handle that information.  
 so, to support a terabyte, multiply by five, which gives  million per 
 year for a supported terabyte of data. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  tapes saved by acs are the typography files originally 
 supporting publication of the journal  cost of building tagged text into 
 the database  
  
  
 during the questionandanswer period that followed weibels 
 presentation, these clarifications emerged.  the tapes saved by the 
 american chemical society are the typography files that originally 
 supported the publication of the journal.  although they are not tagged 
 in sgml, they are tagged in very fine detail.  every single sentence is 
 marked, all the registry numbers, all the publications issues, dates, and 
 volumes.  no cost figures on tagging material on a permegabyte basis 
 were available.  because acss typesetting system runs from tagged text, 
 there is no extra cost per article.  it was unknown what it costs acs to 
 keyboard the tagged text rather than just keyboard the text in the 
 cheapest process.  in other words, since one intends to publish things 
 and will need to build tagged text into a typography system in any case, 
 if one does that in such a way that it can drive not only typography but 
 an electronic system (which is what acs intends to domove to sgml 
 publishing), the marginal cost is zero.  the marginal cost represents the 
 cost of building tagged text into the database, which is small. 
  
                                   
  
  
 sperbergmcqueen  distinction between texts and computers  implications 
 of recognizing that all representation is encoding  dealing with 
 complicated representations of text entails the need for a grammar of 
 documents  variety of forms of formal grammars  text as a bitmapped 
 image does not represent a serious attempt to represent text in 
 electronic form  sgml, the tei, documenttype declarations, and the 
 reusability and longevity of data  tei conformance explicitly allows 
 extension or modification of the tei tag set  administrative background 
 of the tei  several design goals for the tei tag set  an absolutely 
 fixed requirement of the tei guidelines  challenges the tei has 
 attempted to face  good texts not beyond economic feasibility  the 
 issue of reproducibility or processability  the issue of mages as 
 simulacra for the text redux  ones model of text determines what ones 
 software can do with a text and has economic consequences  
  
  
 prior to speaking about sgml and markup, michael sperbergmcqueen, editor, 
 text encoding initiative (tei), university of illinoischicago, first drew 
 a distinction between texts and computers  texts are abstract cultural 
 and linguistic objects while computers are complicated physical devices, 
 he said.  abstract objects cannot be placed inside physical devices with 
 computers one can only represent text and act upon those representations. 
  
 the recognition that all representation is encoding, sperbergmcqueen 
 argued, leads to the recognition of two things  ) the topic description 
 for this session is slightly misleading, because there can be no discussion 
 of pros and cons of textcoding unless what one means is pros and cons of 
 working with text with computers.  ) no text can be represented in a 
 computer without some sort of encoding images are one way of encoding text, 
 ascii is another, sgml yet another.  there is no encoding without some 
 information loss, that is, there is no perfect reproduction of a text that 
 allows one to do away with the original.  thus, the question becomes, 
 what is the most useful representation of text for a serious work 
 this depends on what kind of serious work one is talking about. 
  
 the projects demonstrated the previous day all involved highly complex 
 information and fairly complex manipulation of the textual material. 
 in order to use that complicated information, one has to calculate it 
 slowly or manually and store the result.  it needs to be stored, therefore, 
 as part of ones representation of the text.  thus, one needs to store the 
 structure in the text.  to deal with complicated representations of text, 
 one needs somehow to control the complexity of the representation of a text 
 that means one needs a way of finding out whether a document and an 
 electronic representation of a document is legal or not and that 
 means one needs a grammar of documents. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen discussed the variety of forms of formal grammars, 
 implicit and explicit, as applied to text, and their capabilities.  he 
 argued that these grammars correspond to different models of text that 
 different developers have.  for example, one implicit model of the text 
 is that there is no internal structure, but just one thing after another, 
 a few characters and then perhaps a starttitle command, and then a few 
 more characters and an endtitle command.  sperbergmcqueen also 
 distinguished several kinds of text that have a sort of hierarchical 
 structure that is not very well defined, which, typically, corresponds 
 to grammars that are not very well defined, as well as hierarchies that 
 are very well defined (e.g., the thesaurus linguae graecae) and extremely 
 complicated things such as sgml, which handle strictly hierarchical data 
 very nicely. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen conceded that one other model not illustrated on his two 
 displays was the model of text as a bitmapped image, an image of a page, 
 and confessed to having been converted to a limited extent by the 
 workshop to the view that electronic images constitute a promising, 
 probably superior alternative to microfilming.  but he was not convinced 
 that electronic images represent a serious attempt to represent text in 
 electronic form.  many of their problems stem from the fact that they are 
 not direct attempts to represent the text but attempts to represent the 
 page, thus making them representations of representations. 
  
 in this situation of increasingly complicated textual information and the 
 need to control that complexity in a useful way (which begs the question 
 of the need for good textual grammars), one has the introduction of sgml.  
 with sgml, one can develop specific documenttype declarations 
 for specific text types or, as with the tei, attempts to generate 
 general documenttype declarations that can handle all sorts of text. 
 the tei is an attempt to develop formats for text representation that 
 will ensure the kind of reusability and longevity of data discussed earlier. 
 it offers a way to stay alive in the state of permanent technological 
 revolution. 
  
 it has been a continuing challenge in the tei to create document grammars 
 that do some work in controlling the complexity of the textual object but 
 also allowing one to represent the real text that one will find.  
 fundamental to the notion of the tei is that tei conformance allows one 
 the ability to extend or modify the tei tag set so that it fits the text 
 that one is attempting to represent. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen next outlined the administrative background of the tei.  
 the tei is an international project to develop and disseminate guidelines 
 for the encoding and interchange of machinereadable text.  it is 
 sponsored by the association for computers in the humanities, the 
 association for computational linguistics, and the association for 
 literary and linguistic computing.  representatives of numerous other 
 professional societies sit on its advisory board.  the tei has a number 
 of affiliated projects that have provided assistance by testing drafts of 
 the guidelines. 
  
 among the design goals for the tei tag set, the scheme first of all must 
 meet the needs of research, because the tei came out of the research 
 community, which did not feel adequately served by existing tag sets.  
 the tag set must be extensive as well as compatible with existing and 
 emerging standards.  in , version . of the guidelines was released 
 (sperbergmcqueen illustrated their contents). 
  
 sperbergmcqueen noted that one problem besetting electronic text has 
 been the lack of adequate internal or external documentation for many 
 existing electronic texts.  the tei guidelines as currently formulated 
 contain few fixed requirements, but one of them is this  there must 
 always be a document header, an infile sgml tag that provides 
 ) a bibliographic description of the electronic object one is talking 
 about (that is, who included it, when, what for, and under which title) 
 and ) the copy text from which it was derived, if any.  if there was 
 no copy text or if the copy text is unknown, then one states as much. 
 version . of the guidelines was scheduled to be completed in fall  
 and a revised third version is to be presented to the tei advisory board 
 for its endorsement this coming winter.  the tei itself exists to provide 
 a markup language, not a markedup text. 
  
 among the challenges the tei has attempted to face is the need for a 
 markup language that will work for existing projects, that is, handle the 
 level of markup that people are using now to tag only chapter, section, 
 and paragraph divisions and not much else.  at the same time, such a 
 language also will be able to scale up gracefully to handle the highly 
 detailed markup which many people foresee as the future destination of 
 much electronic text, and which is not the future destination but the 
 present home of numerous electronic texts in specialized areas. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen dismissed the lowestcommondenominator approach as 
 unable to support the kind of applications that draw people who have 
 never been in the public library regularly before, and make them come 
 back.  he advocated more interesting text and more intelligent text.  
 asserting that it is not beyond economic feasibility to have good texts, 
 sperbergmcqueen noted that the tei guidelines listing odd tags 
 contains tags that one is expected to enter every time the relevant 
 textual feature occurs.  it contains all the tags that people need now, 
 and it is not expected that everyone will tag things in the same way. 
  
 the question of how people will tag the text is in large part a function 
 of their reaction to what sperbergmcqueen termed the issue of 
 reproducibility.  what one needs to be able to reproduce are the things 
 one wants to work with.  perhaps a more useful concept than that of 
 reproducibility or recoverability is that of processability, that is, 
 what can one get from an electronic text without reading it again 
 in the original.  he illustrated this contention with a page from 
 jan comeniuss bilingual introduction to latin. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen returned at length to the issue of images as simulacra 
 for the text, in order to reiterate his belief that in the long run more 
 than images of pages of particular editions of the text are needed, 
 because just as secondgeneration photocopies and secondgeneration 
 microfilm degenerate, so secondgeneration representations tend to 
 degenerate, and one tends to overstress some relatively trivial aspects 
 of the text such as its layout on the page, which is not always 
 significant, despite what the text critics might say, and slight other 
 pieces of information such as the very important lexical ties between the 
 english and latin versions of comeniuss bilingual text, for example.  
 moreover, in many crucial respects it is easy to fool oneself concerning 
 what a scanned image of the text will accomplish.  for example, in order 
 to study the transmission of texts, information concerning the text 
 carrier is necessary, which scanned images simply do not always handle.  
 further, even the highquality materials being produced at cornell use 
 much of the information that one would need if studying those books as 
 physical objects.  it is a choice that has been made.  it is an arguably 
 justifiable choice, but one does not know what color those pen strokes in 
 the margin are or whether there was a stain on the page, because it has 
 been filtered out.  one does not know whether there were rips in the page 
 because they do not show up, and on a couple of the marginal marks one 
 loses half of the mark because the pen is very light and the scanner 
 failed to pick it up, and so what is clearly a checkmark in the margin of 
 the original becomes a little scoop in the margin of the facsimile.  
 standard problems for facsimile editions, not new to electronics, but 
 also true of lightlens photography, and are remarked here because it is 
 important that we not fool ourselves that even if we produce a very nice 
 image of this page with good contrast, we are not replacing the 
 manuscript any more than microfilm has replaced the manuscript. 
  
 the tei comes from the research community, where its first allegiance 
 lies, but it is not just an academic exercise.  it has relevance far 
 beyond those who spend all of their time studying text, because ones 
 model of text determines what ones software can do with a text.  good 
 models lead to good software.  bad models lead to bad software.  that has 
 economic consequences, and it is these economic consequences that have 
 led the european community to help support the tei, and that will lead, 
 sperbergmcqueen hoped, some software vendors to realize that if they 
 provide software with a better model of the text they can make a killing. 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  implications of different dtds and tag sets  oda versus sgml  
  
  
 during the discussion that followed, several additional points were made.  
 neither aap (i.e., association of american publishers) nor cals (i.e., 
 computeraided acquisition and logistics support) has a documenttype 
 definition for ancient greek drama, although the tei will be able to 
 handle that.  given this state of affairs and assuming that the 
 technicaljournal producers and the commercial vendors decide to use the 
 other two types, then an institution like the library of congress, which 
 might receive all of their publications, would have to be able to handle 
 three different types of document definitions and tag sets and be able to 
 distinguish among them. 
  
 office document architecture (oda) has some advantages that flow from its 
 tight focus on office documents and clear directions for implementation.  
 much of the oda standard is easier to read and clearer at first reading 
 than the sgml standard, which is extremely general.  what that means is 
 that if one wants to use graphics in tiff and oda, one is stuck, because 
 oda defines graphics formats while tiff does not, whereas sgml says the 
 world is not waiting for this work group to create another graphics format. 
 what is needed is an ability to use whatever graphics format one wants. 
  
 the tei provides a socket that allows one to connect the sgml document to 
 the graphics.  the notation that the graphics are in is clearly a choice 
 that one needs to make based on her or his environment, and that is one 
 advantage.  sgml is less megalomaniacal in attempting to define formats 
 for all kinds of information, though more megalomaniacal in attempting to 
 cover all sorts of documents.  the other advantage is that the model of 
 text represented by sgml is simply an order of magnitude richer and more 
 flexible than the model of text offered by oda.  both offer hierarchical 
 structures, but sgml recognizes that the hierarchical model of the text 
 that one is looking at may not have been in the minds of the designers, 
 whereas oda does not. 
  
 oda is not really aiming for the kind of document that the tei wants to 
 encompass.  the tei can handle the kind of material oda has, as well as a 
 significantly broader range of material.  oda seems to be very much 
 focused on office documents, which is what it started out being called 
 office document architecture. 
  
                                   
  
  
 calaluca  textencoding from a publishers perspective  
 responsibilities of a publisher  reproduction of mignes latin series 
 whole and complete with sgml tags based on perceived need and expected 
 use  particular decisions arising from the general decision to produce 
 and publish pld  
  
  
 the final speaker in this session, eric calaluca, vice president, 
 chadwyckhealey, inc., spoke from the perspective of a publisher re 
 textencoding, rather than as one qualified to discuss methods of 
 encoding data, and observed that the presenters sitting in the room, 
 whether they had chosen to or not, were acting as publishers  making 
 choices, gathering data, gathering information, and making assessments.  
 calaluca offered the hardwon conviction that in publishing very large 
 text files (such as pld), one cannot avoid making personal judgments of 
 appropriateness and structure. 
  
 in calalucas view, encoding decisions stem from prior judgments.  two 
 notions have become axioms for him in the consideration of future sources 
 for electronic publication  ) electronic text publishing is as personal 
 as any other kind of publishing, and questions of if and how to encode 
 the data are simply a consequence of that prior decision  ) all 
 personal decisions are open to criticism, which is unavoidable. 
  
 calaluca rehearsed his role as a publisher or, better, as an intermediary 
 between what is viewed as a sound idea and the people who would make use 
 of it.  finding the specialist to advise in this process is the core of 
 that function.  the publisher must monitor and hug the fine line between 
 giving users what they want and suggesting what they might need.  one 
 responsibility of a publisher is to represent the desires of scholars and 
 research librarians as opposed to bullheadedly forcing them into areas 
 they would not choose to enter. 
  
 calaluca likened the questions being raised today about data structure 
 and standards to the decisions faced by the abbe migne himself during 
 production of the patrologia series in the midnineteenth century.  
 chadwyckhealeys decision to reproduce mignes latin series whole and 
 complete with sgml tags was also based upon a perceived need and an 
 expected use.  in the same way that mignes work came to be far more than 
 a simple handbook for clerics, pld is already far more than a database 
 for theologians.  it is a bedrock source for the study of western 
 civilization, calaluca asserted. 
  
 in regard to the decision to produce and publish pld, the editorial board 
 offered direct judgments on the question of appropriateness of these 
 texts for conversion, their encoding and their distribution, and 
 concluded that the best possible project was one that avoided overt 
 intrusions or exclusions in so important a resource.  thus, the general 
 decision to transmit the original collection as clearly as possible with 
 the widest possible avenues for use led to other decisions  ) to encode 
 the data or not, sgml or not, tei or not.  again, the expected user 
 community asserted the need for normative tagging structures of important 
 humanities texts, and the tei seemed the most appropriate structure for 
 that purpose.  research librarians, who are trained to view the larger 
 impact of electronic text sources on  or  or  doctoral 
 disciplines, loudly approved the decision to include tagging.  they see 
 what is coming better than the specialist who is completely focused on 
 one edition of ambroses de anima, and they also understand that the 
 potential uses exceed present expectations.  ) what will be tagged and 
 what will not.  once again, the board realized that one must tag the 
 obvious.  but in no way should one attempt to identify through encoding 
 schemes every single discrete area of a text that might someday be 
 searched.  that was another decision.  searching by a column number, an 
 author, a word, a volume, permitting combination searches, and tagging 
 notations seemed logical choices as core elements.  ) how does one make 
 the data available  tieing it to a cdrom edition creates limitations, 
 but a magnetic tape file that is very large, is accompanied by the 
 encoding specifications, and that allows one to make local modifications 
 also allows one to incorporate any changes one may desire within the 
 bounds of private research, though exporting tag files from a cdrom 
 could serve just as well.  since no one on the board could possibly 
 anticipate each and every way in which a scholar might choose to mine 
 this data bank, it was decided to satisfy the basics and make some 
 provisions for what might come.  ) not to encode the database would rob 
 it of the interchangeability and portability these important texts should 
 accommodate.  for calaluca, the extensive options presented by fulltext 
 searching require care in text selection and strongly support encoding of 
 data to facilitate the widest possible search strategies.  better 
 software can always be created, but summoning the resources, the people, 
 and the energy to reconvert the text is another matter. 
  
 pld is being encoded, captured, and distributed, because to 
 chadwyckhealey and the board it offers the widest possible array of 
 future research applications that can be seen today.  calaluca concluded 
 by urging the encoding of all important text sources in whatever way 
 seems most appropriate and durable at the time, without blanching at the 
 thought that ones work may require emendation in the future.  (thus, 
 chadwyckhealey produced a very large humanities text database before the 
 final release of the tei guidelines.) 
  
                                   
  
  
 discussion  creating texts with markup advocated  trends in encoding  
 the tei and the issue of interchangeability of standards  a 
 misconception concerning the tei  implications for an institution like 
 lc in the event that a multiplicity of dtds develops  producing images 
 as a first step towards possible conversion to full text through 
 character recognition  the aap tag sets as a common starting point and 
 the need for caution  
  
  
 hockey prefaced the discussion that followed with several comments in 
 favor of creating texts with markup and on trends in encoding.  in the 
 future, when many more texts are available for online searching, real 
 problems in finding what is wanted will develop, if one is faced with 
 millions of words of data.  it therefore becomes important to consider 
 putting markup in texts to help searchers home in on the actual things 
 they wish to retrieve.  various approaches to refining retrieval methods 
 toward this end include building on a computer version of a dictionary 
 and letting the computer look up words in it to obtain more information 
 about the semantic structure or semantic field of a word, its grammatical 
 structure, and syntactic structure. 
  
 hockey commented on the present keen interest in the encoding world 
 in creating  ) machinereadable versions of dictionaries that can be 
 initially tagged in sgml, which gives a structure to the dictionary entry 
 these entries can then be converted into a more rigid or otherwise 
 different database structure inside the computer, which can be treated as 
 a dynamic tool for searching mechanisms ) large bodies of text to study 
 the language.  in order to incorporate more sophisticated mechanisms, 
 more about how words behave needs to be known, which can be learned in 
 part from information in dictionaries.  however, the last ten years have 
 seen much interest in studying the structure of printed dictionaries 
 converted into computerreadable form.  the information one derives about 
 many words from those is only partial, one or two definitions of the 
 common or the usual meaning of a word, and then numerous definitions of 
 unusual usages.  if the computer is using a dictionary to help retrieve 
 words in a text, it needs much more information about the common usages, 
 because those are the ones that occur over and over again.  hence the 
 current interest in developing large bodies of text in computerreadable 
 form in order to study the language.  several projects are engaged in 
 compiling, for example,  million words. hockey described one with 
 which she was associated briefly at oxford university involving 
 compilation of  million words of british english  about  percent of 
 that will contain detailed linguistic tagging encoded in sgml it will 
 have word class taggings, with words identified as nouns, verbs, 
 adjectives, or other parts of speech.  this tagging can then be used by 
 programs which will begin to learn a bit more about the structure of the 
 language, and then, can go to tag more text. 
  
 hockey said that the more that is tagged accurately, the more one can 
 refine the tagging process and thus the bigger body of text one can build 
 up with linguistic tagging incorporated into it.  hence, the more tagging 
 or annotation there is in the text, the more one may begin to learn about 
 language and the more it will help accomplish more intelligent ocr.  she 
 recommended the development of software tools that will help one begin to 
 understand more about a text, which can then be applied to scanning 
 images of that text in that format and to using more intelligence to help 
 one interpret or understand the text. 
  
 hockey posited the need to think about common methods of textencoding 
 for a long time to come, because building these large bodies of text is 
 extremely expensive and will only be done once. 
  
 in the more general discussion on approaches to encoding that followed, 
 these points were made 
  
 besser identified the underlying problem with standards that all have to 
 struggle with in adopting a standard, namely, the tension between a very 
 highly defined standard that is very interchangeable but does not work 
 for everyone because something is lacking, and a standard that is less 
 defined, more open, more adaptable, but less interchangeable.  contending 
 that the way in which people use sgml is not sufficiently defined, besser 
 wondered ) if people resist the tei because they think it is too defined 
 in certain things they do not fit into, and ) how progress with 
 interchangeability can be made without frightening people away. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen replied that the published drafts of the tei had met 
 with surprisingly little objection on the grounds that they do not allow 
 one to handle x or y or z.  particular concerns of the affiliated 
 projects have led, in practice, to discussions of how extensions are to 
 be made the primary concern of any project has to be how it can be 
 represented locally, thus making interchange secondary.  the tei has 
 received much criticism based on the notion that everything in it is 
 required or even recommended, which, as it happens, is a misconception 
 from the beginning,   because none of it is required and very little is 
 actually actively recommended for all cases, except that one document 
 ones source. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen agreed with besser about this tradeoff  all the 
 projects in a set of twenty teiconformant projects will not necessarily 
 tag the material in the same way.  one result of the tei will be that the 
 easiest problems will be solvedthose dealing with the external form of 
 the information but the problem that is hardest in interchange is that 
 one is not encoding what another wants, and vice versa.  thus, after 
 the adoption of a common notation, the differences in the underlying 
 conceptions of what is interesting about texts become more visible. 
 the success of a standard like the tei will lie in the ability of 
 the recipient of interchanged texts to use some of what it contains 
 and to add the information that was not encoded that one wants, in a 
 layered way, so that texts can be gradually enriched and one does not 
 have to put in everything all at once.  hence, having a wellbehaved 
 markup scheme is important. 
  
 stevens followed up on the paradoxical analogy that besser alluded to in 
 the example of the marc records, namely, the formats that are the same 
 except that they are different.  stevens drew a parallel between 
 documenttype definitions and marc records for books and serials and maps, 
 where one has a tagging structure and there is a textinterchange.  
 stevens opined that the producers of the information will set the terms 
 for the standard (i.e., develop documenttype definitions for the users 
 of their products), creating a situation that will be problematical for 
 an institution like the library of congress, which will have to deal with 
 the dtds in the event that a multiplicity of them develops.  thus, 
 numerous people are seeking a standard but cannot find the tag set that 
 will be acceptable to them and their clients.  sperbergmcqueen agreed 
 with this view, and said that the situation was in a way worse  attempting 
 to unify arbitrary dtds resembled attempting to unify a marc record with a 
 bibliographic record done according to the prussian instructions.  
 according to stevens, this situation occurred very early in the process. 
  
 waters recalled from early discussions on project open book the concern 
 of many people that merely by producing images, pob was not really 
 enhancing intellectual access to the material.  nevertheless, not wishing 
 to overemphasize the opposition between imaging and full text, waters 
 stated that pob views getting the images as a first step toward possibly 
 converting to full text through character recognition, if the technology 
 is appropriate.  waters also emphasized that encoding is involved even 
 with a set of images. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen agreed with waters that one can create an sgml document 
 consisting wholly of images.  at first sight, organizing graphic images 
 with an sgml document may not seem to offer great advantages, but the 
 advantages of the scheme waters described would be precisely that 
 ability to move into something that is more of a multimedia document 
 a combination of transcribed text and page images.  weibel concurred in 
 this judgment, offering evidence from project adapt, where a page is 
 divided into text elements and graphic elements, and in fact the text 
 elements are organized by columns and lines.  these lines may be used as 
 the basis for distributing documents in a network environment.  as one 
 develops software intelligent enough to recognize what those elements 
 are, it makes sense to apply sgml to an image initially, that may, in 
 fact, ultimately become more and more text, either through ocr or edited 
 ocr or even just through keying.  for waters, the labor of composing the 
 document and saying this set of documents or this set of images belongs 
 to this document constitutes a significant investment. 
  
 weibel also made the point that the aap tag sets, while not excessively 
 prescriptive, offer a common starting point they do not define the 
 structure of the documents, though.  they have some recommendations about 
 dtds one could use as examples, but they do just suggest tag sets.   for 
 example, the core project attempts to use the aap markup as much as 
 possible, but there are clearly areas where structure must be added.  
 that in no way contradicts the use of aap tag sets. 
  
 sperbergmcqueen noted that the tei prepared a long working paper early 
 on about the aap tag set and what it lacked that the tei thought it 
 needed, and a fairly long critique of the naming conventions, which has 
 led to a very different style of naming in the tei.  he stressed the 
 importance of the opposition between prescriptive markup, the kind that a 
 publisher or anybody can do when producing documents de novo, and 
 descriptive markup, in which one has to take what the text carrier 
 provides.  in these particular tag sets it is easy to overemphasize this 
 opposition, because the aap tag set is extremely flexible.  even if one 
 just used the dtds, they allow almost anything to appear almost anywhere. 
  
                                   
  
 session vi.  copyright issues 
  
  
 peters  several cautions concerning copyright in an electronic 
 environment  review of copyright law in the united states  the notion 
 of the public good and the desirability of incentives to promote it  
 what copyright protects  works not protected by copyright  the rights 
 of copyright holders  publishers concerns in todays electronic 
 environment  compulsory licenses  the price of copyright in a digital 
 medium and the need for cooperation  additional clarifications   rough 
 justice oftentimes the outcome in numerous copyright matters  copyright 
 in an electronic society  copyright law always only sets up the 
 boundaries anything can be changed by contract  
  
  
 marybeth peters, policy planning adviser to the register of copyrights, 
 library of congress,   made several general comments and then opened the 
 floor to discussion of subjects of interest to the audience. 
  
 having attended several sessions in an effort to gain a sense of what 
 people did and where copyright would affect their lives, peters expressed 
 the following cautions 
  
       if one takes and converts materials and puts them in new forms, 
      then, from a copyright point of view, one is creating something and 
      will receive some rights. 
  
       however, if what one is converting already exists, a question 
      immediately arises about the status of the materials in question. 
  
       putting something in the public domain in the united states offers 
      some freedom from anxiety, but distributing it throughout the world 
      on a network is another matter, even if one has put it in the public 
      domain in the united states.  re foreign laws, very frequently a 
      work can be in the public domain in the united states but protected 
      in other countries.  thus, one must consider all of the places a 
      work may reach, lest one unwittingly become liable to being faced 
      with a suit for copyright infringement, or at least a letter 
      demanding discussion of what one is doing. 
  
 peters reviewed copyright law in the united states.  the u.s. 
 constitution effectively states that congress has the power to enact 
 copyright laws for two purposes  ) to encourage the creation and 
 dissemination of intellectual works for the good of society as a whole 
 and, significantly, ) to give creators and those who package and 
 disseminate materials the economic rewards that are due them. 
  
 congress strives to strike a balance, which at times can become an 
 emotional issue.  the united states has never accepted the notion of the 
 natural right of an author so much as it has accepted the notion of the 
 public good and the desirability of incentives to promote it.  this state 
 of affairs, however, has created strains on the international level and 
 is the reason for several of the differences in the laws that we have.  
 today the united states protects almost every kind of work that can be 
 called an expression of an author.  the standard for gaining copyright 
 protection is simply originality.  this is a low standard and means that 
 a work is not copied from something else, as well as shows a certain 
 minimal amount of authorship.  one can also acquire copyright protection 
 for making a new version of preexisting material, provided it manifests 
 some spark of creativity. 
  
 however, copyright does not protect ideas, methods, systemsonly the way 
 that one expresses those things.  nor does copyright protect anything 
 that is mechanical, anything that does not involve choice, or criteria 
 concerning whether or not one should do a thing.  for example, the 
 results of a process called declicking, in which one mechanically removes 
 impure sounds from old recordings, are not copyrightable.  on the other 
 hand, the choice to record a song digitally and to increase the sound of 
 violins or to bring up the tympani constitutes the results of conversion 
 that are copyrightable.  moreover, if a work is protected by copyright in 
 the united states, one generally needs the permission of the copyright 
 owner to convert it.  normally, who will own the newthat is, converted 
 material is a matter of contract.  in the absence of a contract, the 
 person who creates the new material is the author and owner.  but people 
 do not generally think about the copyright implications until after the 
 fact.  peters stressed the need when dealing with copyrighted works to 
 think about copyright in advance.  ones bargaining power is much greater 
 up front than it is down the road. 
  
 peters next discussed works not protected by copyright, for example, any 
 work done by a federal employee as part of his or her official duties is 
 in the public domain in the united states.  the issue is not wholly free 
 of doubt concerning whether or not the work is in the public domain 
 outside the united states.  other materials in the public domain include  
 any works published more than seventyfive years ago, and any work 
 published in the united states more than twentyeight years ago, whose 
 copyright was not renewed.  in talking about the new technology and 
 putting material in a digital form to send all over the world, peters 
 cautioned, one must keep in mind that while the rights may not be an 
 issue in the united states, they may be in different parts of the world, 
 where most countries previously employed a copyright term of the life of 
 the author plus fifty years. 
  
 peters next reviewed the economics of copyright holding.  simply, 
 economic rights are the rights to control the reproduction of a work in 
 any form.  they belong to the author, or in the case of a work made for 
 hire, the employer.  the second right, which is critical to conversion, 
 is the right to change a work.  the right to make new versions is perhaps 
 one of the most significant rights of authors, particularly in an 
 electronic world.  the third right is the right to publish the work and 
 the right to disseminate it, something that everyone who deals in an 
 electronic medium needs to know.  the basic rule is if a copy is sold, 
 all rights of distribution are extinguished with the sale of that copy.  
 the key is that it must be sold.  a number of companies overcome this 
 obstacle by leasing or renting their product.  these companies argue that 
 if the material is rented or leased and not sold, they control the uses 
 of a work.  the fourth right, and one very important in a digital world, 
 is a right of public performance, which means the right to show the work 
 sequentially.  for example, copyright owners control the showing of a 
 cdrom product in a public place such as a public library.  the reverse 
 side of public performance is something called the right of public 
 display.  moral rights also exist, which at the federal level apply only 
 to very limited visual works of art, but in theory may apply under 
 contract and other principles.  moral rights may include the right of an 
 author to have his or her name on a work, the right of attribution, and 
 the right to object to distortion or mutilationthe right of integrity. 
  
 the way copyright law is worded gives much latitude to activities such as 
 preservation to use of material for scholarly and research purposes when 
 the user does not make multiple copies and to the generation of 
 facsimile copies of unpublished works by libraries for themselves and 
 other libraries.  but the law does not allow anyone to become the 
 distributor of the product for the entire world.  in todays electronic 
 environment, publishers are extremely concerned that the entire world is 
 networked and can obtain the information desired from a single copy in a 
 single library.  hence, if there is to be only one sale, which publishers 
 may choose to live with, they will obtain their money in other ways, for 
 example, from access and use.  hence, the development of site licenses 
 and other kinds of agreements to cover what publishers believe they 
 should be compensated for.  any solution that the united states takes 
 today has to consider the international arena. 
  
 noting that the united states is a member of the berne convention and 
 subscribes to its provisions, peters described the permissions process.  
 she also defined compulsory licenses.  a compulsory license, of which the 
 united states has had a few, builds into the law the right to use a work 
 subject to certain terms and conditions.  in the international arena, 
 however, the ability to use compulsory licenses is extremely limited.  
 thus, clearinghouses and other collectives comprise one option that has 
 succeeded in providing for use of a work.  often overlooked when one 
 begins to use copyrighted material and put products together is how 
 expensive the permissions process and managing it is.  according to 
 peters, the price of copyright in a digital medium, whatever solution is 
 worked out, will include managing and assembling the database.  she 
 strongly recommended that publishers and librarians or people with 
 various backgrounds cooperate to work out administratively feasible 
 systems, in order to produce better results. 
  
 in the lengthy questionandanswer period that followed peterss 
 presentation, the following points emerged 
  
       the copyright office maintains that anything mechanical and 
      totally exhaustive probably is not protected.  in the event that 
      what an individual did in developing potentially copyrightable 
      material is not understood, the copyright office will ask about the 
      creative choices the applicant chose to make or not to make.  as a 
      practical matter, if one believes she or he has made enough of those 
      choices, that person has a right to assert a copyright and someone 
      else must assert that the work is not copyrightable.  the more 
      mechanical, the more automatic, a thing is, the less likely it is to 
      be copyrightable. 
  
       nearly all photographs are deemed to be copyrightable, but no one 
      worries about them much, because everyone is free to take the same 
      image.  thus, a photographic copyright represents what is called a 
      thin copyright.  the photograph itself must be duplicated, in 
      order for copyright to be violated. 
  
       the copyright office takes the position that xrays are not 
      copyrightable because they are mechanical.  it  can be argued 
      whether or not image enhancement in scanning can be protected.  one 
      must exercise care with material created with public funds and 
      generally in the public domain.  an article written by a federal 
      employee, if written as part of official duties, is not 
      copyrightable.  however, control over a scientific article written 
      by a national institutes of health grantee (i.e., someone who 
      receives money from the u.s. government), depends on nih policy.  if 
      the government agency has no policy (and that policy can be 
      contained in its regulations, the contract, or the grant), the 
      author retains copyright.  if a provision of the contract, grant, or 
      regulation states that there will be no copyright, then it does not 
      exist.  when a work is created, copyright automatically comes into 
      existence unless something exists that says it does not. 
  
       an enhanced electronic copy of a print copy of an older reference 
      work in the public domain that does not contain copyrightable new 
      material is a purely mechanical rendition of the original work, and 
      is not copyrightable. 
  
       usually, when a work enters the public domain, nothing can remove 
      it.  for example, congress recently passed into law the concept of 
      automatic renewal, which means that copyright on any work published 
      between l and l does not have to be renewed in order to 
      receive a seventyfiveyear term.  but any work not renewed before 
       is in the public domain. 
  
       concerning whether or not the united states keeps track of when 
      authors die, nothing was ever done, nor is anything being done at 
      the moment by the copyright office. 
  
       software that drives a mechanical process is itself copyrightable.  
      if one changes platforms, the software itself has a copyright.  the 
      world intellectual property organization will hold a symposium  
      march through  april l, at harvard university, on digital 
      technology, and will study this entire issue.  if one purchases a 
      computer software package, such as macpaint, and creates something 
      new, one receives protection only for that which has been added. 
  
 peters added that often in copyright matters, rough justice is the 
 outcome, for example, in collective licensing, ascap (i.e., american 
 society of composers, authors, and publishers), and bmi (i.e., broadcast 
 music, inc.), where it may seem that the big guys receive more than their 
 due.  of course, people ought not to copy a creative product without 
 paying for it there should be some compensation.  but the truth of the 
 world, and it is not a great truth, is that the big guy gets played on 
 the radio more frequently than the little guy, who has to do much more 
 until he becomes a big guy.  that is true of every author, every 
 composer, everyone, and, unfortunately, is part of life. 
  
 copyright always originates with the author, except in cases of works 
 made for hire.  (most software falls into this category.)  when an author 
 sends his article to a journal, he has not relinquished copyright, though 
 he retains the right to relinquish it.  the author receives absolutely 
 everything.  the less prominent the author, the more leverage the 
 publisher will have in contract negotiations.  in order to transfer the 
 rights, the author must sign an agreement giving them away. 
  
 in an electronic society, it is important to be able to license a writer 
 and work out deals.  with regard to use of a work, it usually is much 
 easier when a publisher holds the rights.  in an electronic era, a real 
 problem arises when one is digitizing and making information available.  
 peters referred again to electronic licensing clearinghouses.  copyright 
 ought to remain with the author, but as one moves forward globally in the 
 electronic arena, a middleman who can handle the various rights becomes 
 increasingly necessary. 
  
 the notion of copyright law is that it resides with the individual, but 
 in an online environment, where a work can be adapted and tinkered with 
 by many individuals, there is concern.  if changes are authorized and 
 there is no agreement to the contrary, the person who changes a work owns 
 the changes.  to put it another way, the person who acquires permission 
 to change a work technically will become the author and the owner, unless 
 some agreement to the contrary has been made.  it is typical for the 
 original publisher to try to control all of the versions and all of the 
 uses.  copyright law always only sets up the boundaries.  anything can be 
 changed by contract. 
  
                                   
  
 session vii.  conclusion 
  
  
 general discussion  two questions for discussion  different emphases in 
 the workshop  bringing the text and image partisans together  
 desiderata in planning the longterm development of something  questions 
 surrounding the issue of electronic deposit  discussion of electronic 
 deposit as an allusion to the issue of standards  need for a directory 
 of preservation projects in digital form and for access to their 
 digitized files  ceths catalogue of machinereadable texts in the 
 humanities  what constitutes a publication in the electronic world  
 need for lc to deal with the concept of online publishing  lcs network 
 development office  exploring the limits of marc as a standard in terms 
 of handling electronic information  magnitude of the problem and the 
 need for distributed responsibility in order to maintain and store 
 electronic information  workshop participants to be viewed as a starting 
 point  development of a network version of am urged  a step toward ams 
 construction of some sort of apparatus for network access  a delicate 
 and agonizing policy question for lc  re the issue of electronic 
 deposit, lc urged to initiate a catalytic process in terms of distributed 
 responsibility  suggestions for cooperative ventures  commercial 
 publishers fears  strategic questions for getting the image and text 
 people to think through longterm cooperation  clarification of the 
 driving force behind both the perseus and the cornell xerox projects  
  
  
 in his role as moderator of the concluding session, gifford raised two 
 questions he believed would benefit from discussion  ) are there enough 
 commonalities among those of us that have been here for two days so that 
 we can see courses of action that should be taken in the future  and, if 
 so, what are they and who might take them  ) partly derivative from 
 that, but obviously very dangerous to lc as host, do you see a role for 
 the library of congress in all this  of course, the library of congress 
 holds a rather special status in a number of these matters, because it is 
 not perceived as a player with an economic stake in them, but are there 
 roles that lc can play that can help advance us toward where we are heading 
  
 describing himself as an uninformed observer of the technicalities of the 
 last two days, gifford detected three different emphases in the workshop  
 ) people who are very deeply committed to text ) people who are almost 
 passionate about images and ) a few people who are very committed to 
 what happens to the networks.  in other words, the new networking 
 dimension, the accessibility of the processability, the portability of 
 all this across the networks.  how do we pull those three together 
  
 adding a question that reflected hockeys comment that this was the 
 fourth workshop she had attended in the previous thirty days, fleischhauer 
 wondered to what extent this meeting had reinvented the wheel, or if it 
 had contributed anything in the way of bringing together a different group 
 of people from those who normally appear on the workshop circuit. 
  
 hockey confessed to being struck at this meeting and the one the 
 electronic pierce consortium organized the previous week that this was a 
 coming together of people working on texts and not images.  attempting to 
 bring the two together is something we ought to be thinking about for the 
 future  how one can think about working with image material to begin 
 with, but structuring it and digitizing it in such a way that at a later 
 stage it can be interpreted into text, and find a common way of building 
 text and images together so that they can be used jointly in the future, 
 with the network support to begin there because that is how people will 
 want to access it. 
  
 in planning the longterm development of something, which is what is 
 being done in electronic text, hockey stressed the importance not only 
 of discussing the technical aspects of how one does it but particularly 
 of thinking about what the people who use the stuff will want to do. 
 but conversely, there are numerous things that people start to do with 
 electronic text or material that nobody ever thought of in the beginning. 
  
 lesk, in response to the question concerning the role of the library of 
 congress, remarked the often suggested desideratum of having electronic 
 deposit  since everything is now computertypeset, an entire decade of 
 material that was machinereadable exists, but the publishers frequently 
 did not save it has lc taken any action to have its copyright deposit 
 operation start collecting these machinereadable versions  in the 
 absence of peters, gifford replied that the question was being 
 actively considered but that that was only one dimension of the problem. 
 another dimension is the whole question of the integrity of the original 
 electronic document.  it becomes highly important in science to prove 
 authorship.  how will that be done 
  
 erway explained that, under the old policy, to make a claim for a 
 copyright for works that were published in electronic form, including 
 software, one had to submit a paper copy of the first and last twenty 
 pages of codesomething that represented the work but did not include 
 the entire work itself and had little value to anyone.  as a temporary 
 measure, lc has claimed the right to demand electronic versions of 
 electronic publications.  this measure entails a proactive role for the 
 library to say that it wants a particular electronic version.  publishers 
 then have perhaps a year to submit it.  but the real problem for lc is 
 what to do with all this material in all these different formats.  will 
 the library mount it  how will it give people access to it  how does lc 
 keep track of the appropriate computers, software, and media  the situation 
 is so hard to control, erway said, that it makes sense for each publishing 
 house to maintain its own archive.  but lc cannot enforce that either. 
  
 gifford acknowledged lesks suggestion that establishing a priority 
 offered the solution, albeit a fairly complicated one.  but who maintains 
 that register, he asked.  graber noted that lc does attempt to collect a 
 macintosh version and the ibmcompatible version of software.  it does 
 not collect other versions.  but while true for software, byrum observed, 
 this reply does not speak to materials, that is, all the materials that 
 were published that were on somebodys microcomputer or driver tapes 
 at a publishing office across the country.  lc does well to acquire 
 specific machinereadable products selectively that were intended to be 
 machinereadable.  materials that were in machinereadable form at one time, 
 byrum said, would be beyond lcs capability at the moment, insofar as 
 attempting to acquire, organize, and preserve them are concernedand 
 preservation would be the most important consideration.  in this 
 connection, gifford reiterated the need to work out some sense of 
 distributive responsibility for a number of these issues, which 
 inevitably will require significant cooperation and discussion. 
 nobody can do it all. 
  
 lesk suggested that some publishers may look with favor on lc beginning 
 to serve as a depository of tapes in an electronic manuscript standard.  
 publishers may view this as a service that they did not have to perform 
 and they might send in tapes.  however, sperbergmcqueen countered, 
 although publishers have had equivalent services available to them for a 
 long time, the electronic text archive has never turned away or been 
 flooded with tapes and is forever sending feedback to the depositor.  
 some publishers do send in tapes. 
  
 andre viewed this discussion as an allusion to the issue of standards.  
 she recommended that the aap standard and the tei, which has already been 
 somewhat harmonized internationally and which also shares several 
 compatibilities with the aap, be harmonized to ensure sufficient 
 compatibility in the software.  she drew the line at saying lc ought to 
 be the locus or forum for such harmonization. 
  
 taking the group in a slightly different direction, but one where at 
 least in the near term lc might play a helpful role, lynch remarked the 
 plans of a number of projects to carry out preservation by creating 
 digital images that will end up in online or nearline storage at some 
 institution.   presumably, lc will link this material somehow to its 
 online catalog in most cases.  thus, it is in a digital form.  lynch had 
 the impression that many of these institutions would be willing to make 
 those files accessible to other people outside the institution, provided 
 that there is no copyright problem.  this desideratum will require 
 propagating the knowledge that those digitized files exist, so that they 
 can end up in other online catalogs.  although uncertain about the 
 mechanism for achieving this result, lynch said that it warranted 
 scrutiny because it seemed to be connected to some of the basic issues of 
 cataloging and distribution of records.  it would be  foolish, given the 
 amount of work that all of us have to do and our meager resources, to 
 discover multiple institutions digitizing the same work.  re microforms, 
 lynch said, we are in pretty good shape. 
  
 battin called this a big problem and noted that the cornell people (who 
 had already departed) were working on it.  at issue from the beginning 
 was to learn how to catalog that information into rlin and then into 
 oclc, so that it would be accessible.  that issue remains to be resolved.  
 lynch rejoined that putting it into oclc or rlin was helpful insofar as 
 somebody who is thinking of performing preservation activity on that work 
 could learn about it.  it is not necessarily helpful for institutions to 
 make that available.  battin opined that the idea was that it not only be 
 for preservation purposes but for the convenience of people looking for 
 this material.  she endorsed lynchs dictum that duplication of this 
 effort was to be avoided by every means. 
  
 hockey informed the workshop about one major current activity of ceth, 
 namely a catalogue of machinereadable texts in the humanities.  held on 
 rlin at present, the catalogue has been concentrated on ascii as opposed 
 to digitized images of text.  she is exploring ways to improve the 
 catalogue and make it more widely available, and welcomed suggestions 
 about these concerns.  ceth owns the records, which are not just 
 restricted to rlin, and can distribute them however it wishes. 
  
 taking up lesks earlier question, battin inquired whether lc, since it 
 is accepting electronic files and designing a mechanism for dealing with 
 that rather than putting books on shelves, would become responsible for 
 the national copyright depository of electronic materials.  of course 
 that could not be accomplished overnight, but it would be something lc 
 could plan for.  gifford acknowledged that much thought was being devoted 
 to that set of problems and returned the discussion to the issue raised 
 by lynchwhether or not putting the kind of records that both battin and 
 hockey have been talking about in rlin is not a satisfactory solution.  
 it seemed to him that rlin answered lynchs original point concerning 
 some kind of directory for these kinds of materials.  in a situation 
 where somebody is attempting to decide whether or not to scan this or 
 film that or to learn whether or not someone has already done so, lynch 
 suggested, rlin is helpful, but it is not helpful in the case of a local, 
 online catalogue.  further, one would like to have her or his system be 
 aware that that exists in digital form, so that one can present it to a 
 patron, even though one did not digitize it, if it is out of copyright.  
 the only way to make those linkages would be to perform a tremendous 
 amount of realtime lookup, which would be awkward at best, or 
 periodically to yank the whole file from rlin and match it against ones 
 own stuff, which is a nuisance. 
  
 but where, erway inquired, does one stop including things that are 
 available with internet, for instance, in ones local catalogue 
 it almost seems that that is lcs means to acquire access to them. 
 that represents lcs new form of library loan.  perhaps lcs new online 
 catalogue is an amalgamation of all these catalogues on line.  lynch 
 conceded that perhaps that was true in the very long term, but was not 
 applicable to scanning in the short term.  in his view, the totals cited 
 by yale, , books over perhaps a fouryear period, and ,, 
 books from cornell, were not big numbers, while searching all over 
 creation for relatively rare occurrences will prove to be less efficient.  
 as gifford wondered if this would not be a separable file on rlin and 
 could be requested from them, battin interjected that it was easily 
 accessible to an institution.  severtson pointed out that that file, cum 
 enhancements, was available with reference information on cdrom, which 
 makes it a little more available. 
  
 in hockeys view, the real question facing the workshop is what to put in 
 this catalogue, because that raises the question of what constitutes a 
 publication in the electronic world.  (weibel interjected that eric joule 
 in oclcs office of research is also wrestling with this particular 
 problem, while gifford thought it sounded fairly generic.)  hockey 
 contended that a majority of texts in the humanities are in the hands 
 of either a small number of large research institutions or individuals 
 and are not generally available for anyone else to access at all. 
 she wondered if these texts ought to be catalogued. 
  
 after argument proceeded back and forth for several minutes over why 
 cataloguing might be a necessary service, lebron suggested that this 
 issue involved the responsibility of a publisher.  the fact that someone 
 has created something electronically and keeps it under his or her 
 control does not constitute publication.  publication implies 
 dissemination.  while it would be important for a scholar to let other 
 people know that this creation exists, in many respects this is no 
 different from an unpublished manuscript.  that is what is being accessed 
 in there, except that now one is not looking at it in the hardcopy but 
 in the electronic environment. 
  
 lebron expressed puzzlement at the variety of ways electronic publishing 
 has been viewed.  much of what has been discussed throughout these two 
 days has concerned cdrom publishing, whereas in the online environment 
 that she confronts, the constraints and challenges are very different.  
 sooner or later lc will have to deal with the concept of online 
 publishing.  taking up the comment erway made earlier about storing 
 copies, lebron gave her own journal as an example.  how would she deposit 
 ojcct for copyright, she asked, because the journal will exist in the 
 mainframe at oclc and people will be able to access it.  here the 
 situation is different, ownership versus access, and is something that 
 arises with publication in the online environment, faster than is 
 sometimes realized.  lacking clear answers to all of these questions 
 herself, lebron did not anticipate that lc would be able to take a role 
 in helping to define some of them for quite a while. 
  
 greenfield observed that lcs network development office is attempting, 
 among other things, to explore the limits of marc as a standard in terms 
 of handling electronic information.  greenfield also noted that rebecca 
 guenther from that office gave a paper to the american society for 
 information science (asis) summarizing several of the discussion papers 
 that were coming out of the network development office.  greenfield said 
 he understood that that office had a listserver soliciting just the kind 
 of feedback received today concerning the difficulties of identifying and 
 cataloguing electronic information.  greenfield hoped that everybody 
 would be aware of that and somehow contribute to that conversation. 
  
 noting two of lcs roles, first, to act as a repository of record for 
 material that is copyrighted in this country, and second, to make 
 materials it holds available in some limited form to a clientele that 
 goes beyond congress, besser suggested that it was incumbent on lc to 
 extend those responsibilities to all the things being published in 
 electronic form.  this would mean eventually accepting electronic 
 formats.  lc could require that at some point they be in a certain 
 limited set of formats, and then develop mechanisms for allowing people 
 to access those in the same way that other things are accessed.  this 
 does not imply that they are on the network and available to everyone.  
 lc does that with most of its bibliographic records, besser said, which 
 end up migrating to the utility (e.g., oclc) or somewhere else.  but just 
 as most of lcs books are available in some form through interlibrary 
 loan or some other mechanism, so in the same way electronic formats ought 
 to be available to others in some format, though with some copyright 
 considerations.  besser was not suggesting that these mechanisms be 
 established tomorrow, only that they seemed to fall within lcs purview, 
 and that there should be longrange plans to establish them. 
  
 acknowledging that those from lc in the room agreed with besser 
 concerning the need to confront difficult questions, gifford underscored 
 the magnitude of the problem of what to keep and what to select.  gifford 
 noted that lc currently receives some , items per day, not counting 
 electronic materials, and argued for much more distributed responsibility 
 in order to maintain and store electronic information. 
  
 besser responded that the assembled group could be viewed as a starting 
 point, whose initial operating premise could be helping to move in this 
 direction and defining how lc could do so, for example, in areas of 
 standardization or distribution of responsibility. 
  
 fleischhauer added that am was fully engaged, wrestling with some of the 
 questions that pertain to the conversion of older historical materials, 
 which would be one thing that the library of congress might do.  several 
 points mentioned by besser and several others on this question have a 
 much greater impact on those who are concerned with cataloguing and the 
 networking of bibliographic information, as well as preservation itself. 
  
 speaking directly to am, which he considered was a largely uncopyrighted 
 database, lynch urged development of a network version of am, or 
 consideration of making the data in it available to people interested in 
 doing network multimedia.  on account of the current great shortage of 
 digital data that is both appealing and unencumbered by complex rights 
 problems, this course of action could have a significant effect on making 
 network multimedia a reality. 
  
 in this connection, fleischhauer reported on a fragmentary prototype in 
 lcs office of information technology services that attempts to associate 
 digital images of photographs with cataloguing information in ways that 
 work within a local area networka step, so to say, toward ams 
 construction of some sort of apparatus for access.  further, am has 
 attempted to use standard data forms in order to help make that 
 distinction between the access tools and the underlying data, and thus 
 believes that the database is networkable. 
  
 a delicate and agonizing policy question for lc, however, which comes 
 back to resources and unfortunately has an impact on this, is to find 
 some appropriate, honorable, and legal costrecovery possibilities.  a 
 certain skittishness concerning costrecovery has made people unsure 
 exactly what to do.  am would be highly receptive to discussing further 
 lynchs offer to test or demonstrate its database in a network 
 environment, fleischhauer said. 
  
 returning the discussion to what she viewed as the vital issue of 
 electronic deposit, battin recommended that lc initiate a catalytic 
 process in terms of distributed responsibility, that is, bring together 
 the distributed organizations and set up a study group to look at all 
 these issues and see where we as a nation should move.  the broader 
 issues of how we deal with the management of electronic information will 
 not disappear, but only grow worse. 
  
 lesk took up this theme and suggested that lc attempt to persuade one 
 major library in each state to deal with its state equivalent publisher, 
 which might produce a cooperative project that would be equitably 
 distributed around the country, and one in which lc would be dealing with 
 a minimal number of publishers and minimal copyright problems. 
  
 graber remarked the recent development in the scientific community of a 
 willingness to use sgml and either deposit or interchange on a fairly 
 standardized format.  he wondered if a similar movement was taking place 
 in the humanities.  although the national library of medicine found only 
 a few publishers to cooperate in a like venture two or three years ago, a 
 new effort might generate a much larger number willing to cooperate. 
  
 kimball recounted his units (machinereadable collections reading room) 
 troubles with the commercial publishers of electronic media in acquiring 
 materials for lcs collections, in particular the publishers fear that 
 they would not be able to cover their costs and would lose control of 
 their products, that lc would give them away or sell them and make 
 profits from them.  he doubted that the publishing industry was prepared 
 to move into this area at the moment, given its resistance to allowing lc 
 to use its machinereadable materials as the library would like. 
  
 the copyright law now addresses compact disk as a medium, and lc can 
 request one copy of that, or two copies if it is the only version, and 
 can request copies of software, but that fails to address magazines or 
 books or anything like that which is in machinereadable form. 
  
 gifford acknowledged the thorny nature of this issue, which he illustrated 
 with the example of the cumbersome process involved in putting a copy of a 
 scientific database on a lan in lcs science reading room.  he also 
 acknowledged that lc needs help and could enlist the energies and talents 
 of workshop participants in thinking through a number of these problems. 
  
 gifford returned the discussion to getting the image and text people to 
 think through together where they want to go in the long term.  mylonas 
 conceded that her experience at the pierce symposium the previous week at 
 georgetown university and this week at lc had forced her to reevaluate 
 her perspective on the usefulness of text as images.  mylonas framed the 
 issues in a series of questions  how do we acquire machinereadable 
 text  do we take pictures of it and perform ocr on it later  is it 
 important to obtain very highquality images and text, etc.  
 fleischhauer agreed with mylonass framing of strategic questions, adding 
 that a large institution such as lc probably has to do all of those 
 things at different times.  thus, the trick is to exercise judgment.  the 
 workshop had added to his and ams considerations in making those 
 judgments.  concerning future meetings or discussions, mylonas suggested 
 that screening priorities would be helpful. 
  
 weibel opined that the diversity reflected in this group was a sign both 
 of the health and of the immaturity of the field, and more time would 
 have to pass before we convince one another concerning standards. 
  
 an exchange between mylonas and battin clarified the point that the 
 driving force behind both the perseus and the cornell xerox projects was 
 the preservation of knowledge for the future, not simply for particular 
 research use.  in the case of perseus, mylonas said, the assumption was 
 that the texts would not be entered again into electronically readable 
 form.  sperbergmcqueen added that a scanned image would not serve as an 
 archival copy for purposes of preservation in the case of, say, the bill 
 of rights, in the sense that the scanned images are effectively the 
 archival copies for the cornell mathematics books. 
  
  
                                   
  
  
                           appendix i  program 
  
  
  
                                 workshop 
                                    on 
                                electronic 
                                   texts 
  
  
  
                               june  
  
                            library of congress 
                             washington, d.c. 
  
  
  
     supported by a grant from the david and lucile packard foundation 
  
  
 tuesday,  june  
  
 national demonstration lab, atrium, library madison 
  
  am   coffee and danish, registration 
  
  am   welcome 
  
           prosser gifford, director for scholarly programs, and carl 
              fleischhauer, coordinator, american memory, library of 
              congress 
  
 l am   session i.  content in a new form  who will use it and what 
           will they do 
  
           broad description of the range of electronic information.  
           characterization of who uses it and how it is or may be used.  
           in addition to a look at scholarly uses, this session will 
           include a presentation on use by students (k and college) 
           and the general public. 
  
           moderator  james daly 
           avra michelson, archival research and evaluation staff, 
              national archives and records administration (overview) 
           susan h. veccia, team leader, american memory, user evaluation, 
              and 
           joanne freeman, associate coordinator, american memory, library 
              of congress (beyond the scholar) 
  
  
  am  break 
  
  am  session ii.  show and tell. 
  
           each presentation to consist of a fifteenminute 
           statementshow group discussion will follow lunch. 
  
           moderator  jacqueline hess, director, national demonstration 
              lab 
  
             .  a classics project, stressing texts and text retrieval 
                 more than multimedia  perseus project, harvard 
                 university 
                 elli mylonas, managing editor 
  
             .  other humanities projects employing the emerging norms of 
                 the text encoding initiative (tei)  chadwyckhealeys 
                 the english poetry full text database andor patrologia 
                 latina database 
                 eric m. calaluca, vice president, chadwyckhealey, inc. 
  
             .  american memory 
                 carl fleischhauer, coordinator, and 
                 ricky erway, associate coordinator, library of congress 
  
             .  founding fathers example from packard humanities 
                 institute  the papers of george washington, university 
                 of virginia 
                 dorothy twohig, managing editor, andor 
                 david woodley packard 
  
             .  an electronic medical journal offering graphics and 
                 fulltext searchability  the online journal of current 
                 clinical trials, american association for the advancement 
                 of science 
                 maria l. lebron, managing editor 
  
             .  a project that offers facsimile images of pages but omits 
                 searchable text  cornell math books 
                 lynne k. personius, assistant director, cornell 
                    information technologies for scholarly information 
                    sources, cornell university 
  
  pm  lunch  (dining room a, library madison .  exhibits 
           available.) 
  
  pm   session ii.  show and tell (contd.). 
  
  
  pm   break 
  
  
  pm   session iii.  distribution, networks, and networking  options 
           for dissemination. 
  
           published disks  university presses and publicsector 
              publishers, privatesector publishers 
           computer networks 
  
           moderator  robert g. zich, special assistant to the associate 
              librarian for special projects, library of congress 
           clifford a. lynch, director, library automation, university of 
              california 
           howard besser, school of library and information science, 
              university of pittsburgh 
           ronald l. larsen, associate director of libraries for 
              information technology, university of maryland at college 
              park 
           edwin b. brownrigg, executive director, memex research 
              institute 
  
  pm   reception  (montpelier room, library madison .) 
  
                                   
  
 wednesday,  june  
  
 dining room a, library madison  
  
  am   coffee and danish 
  
  am   session iv.  image capture, text capture, overview of text and 
           image storage formats. 
  
           moderator  william l. hooton, vice president of operations, 
              inet 
  
           a) principal methods for image capture of text 
              direct scanning 
              use of microform 
  
           anne r. kenney, assistant director, department of preservation 
              and conservation, cornell university 
           pamela q.j. andre, associate director, automation, and 
           judith a. zidar, coordinator, national agricultural text 
              digitizing program (natdp), national agricultural library 
              (nal) 
           donald j. waters, head, systems office, yale university library 
  
           b) special problems 
              bound volumes 
              conservation 
              reproducing printed halftones 
  
           carl fleischhauer, coordinator, american memory, library of 
              congress 
           george thoma, chief, communications engineering branch, 
              national library of medicine (nlm) 
  
  
  am  break 
  
  am  session iv.  image capture, text capture, overview of text and 
           image storage formats (contd.). 
  
           c) image standards and implications for preservation 
  
           jean baronas, senior manager, department of standards and 
              technology, association for information and image management 
              (aiim) 
           patricia battin, president, the commission on preservation and 
              access (cpa) 
  
           d) text conversion 
              ocr vs. rekeying 
              standards of accuracy and use of imperfect texts 
              service bureaus 
  
           stuart weibel, senior research specialist, online computer 
              library center, inc. (oclc) 
           michael lesk, executive director, computer science research, 
              bellcore 
           ricky erway, associate coordinator, american memory, library of 
              congress 
           pamela q.j. andre, associate director, automation, and 
           judith a. zidar, coordinator, national agricultural text 
              digitizing program (natdp), national agricultural library 
              (nal) 
  
  
  pm   lunch 
  
  pm   session v.  approaches to preparing electronic texts. 
  
           discussion of approaches to structuring text for the computer 
           pros and cons of text coding, description of methods in 
           practice, and comparison of textcoding methods. 
  
           moderator  susan hockey, director, center for electronic texts 
              in the humanities (ceth), rutgers and princeton universities 
           david woodley packard 
           c.m. sperbergmcqueen, editor, text encoding initiative (tei), 
              university of illinoischicago 
           eric m. calaluca, vice president, chadwyckhealey, inc. 
  
  
  pm   break 
  
  pm   session vi.  copyright issues. 
  
           marybeth peters, policy planning adviser to the register of 
              copyrights, library of congress 
  
  pm   session vii. conclusion. 
  
           general discussion. 
           what topics were omitted or given short shrift that anyone 
              would like to talk about now 
           is there a group here  what should the group do next, if 
              anything  what should the library of congress do next, if 
              anything 
           moderator  prosser gifford, director for scholarly programs, 
              library of congress 
  
  pm   adjourn 
  
  
                                   
  
  
                          appendix ii  abstracts 
  
  
 session i 
  
 avra michelson           forecasting the use of electronic texts by 
                          social sciences and humanities scholars 
  
 this presentation explores the ways in which electronic texts are likely 
 to be used by the nonscientific scholarly community.  many of the 
 remarks are drawn from a report the speaker coauthored with jeff 
 rothenberg, a computer scientist at the rand corporation. 
  
 the speaker assesses ) current scholarly use of information technology 
 and ) the key trends in information technology most relevant to the 
 research process, in order to predict how social sciences and humanities 
 scholars are apt to use electronic texts.  in introducing the topic, 
 current use of electronic texts is explored broadly within the context of 
 scholarly communication.  from the perspective of scholarly 
 communication, the work of humanities and social sciences scholars 
 involves five processes  ) identification of sources, ) communication 
 with colleagues, ) interpretation and analysis of data, ) dissemination 
 of research findings, and ) curriculum development and instruction.  the 
 extent to which computation currently permeates aspects of scholarly 
 communication represents a viable indicator of the prospects for 
 electronic texts. 
  
 the discussion of current practice is balanced by an analysis of key 
 trends in the scholarly use of information technology.  these include the 
 trends toward enduser computing and connectivity, which provide a 
 framework for forecasting the use of electronic texts through this 
 millennium.  the presentation concludes with a summary of the ways in 
 which the nonscientific scholarly community can be expected to use 
 electronic texts, and the implications of that use for information 
 providers. 
  
 susan veccia and joanne freeman    electronic archives for the public  
                                    use of american memory in public and 
                                    school libraries 
  
 this joint discussion focuses on nonscholarly applications of electronic 
 library materials, specifically addressing use of the library of congress 
 american memory (am) program in a small number of public and school 
 libraries throughout the united states.  am consists of selected library 
 of congress primary archival materials, stored on optical media 
 (cdromvideodisc), and presented with little or no editing.  many 
 collections are accompanied by electronic introductions and users guides 
 offering background information and historical context.  collections 
 represent a variety of formats including photographs, graphic arts, 
 motion pictures, recorded sound, music, broadsides and manuscripts, 
 books, and pamphlets. 
  
 in , the library of congress began a nationwide evaluation of am in 
 different types of institutions.  test sites include public libraries, 
 elementary and secondary school libraries, college and university 
 libraries, state libraries, and special libraries.  susan veccia and 
 joanne freeman will discuss their observations on the use of am by the 
 nonscholarly community, using evidence gleaned from this ongoing 
 evaluation effort. 
  
 veccia will comment on the overall goals of the evaluation project, and 
 the types of public and school libraries included in this study.  her 
 comments on nonscholarly use of am will focus on the public library as a 
 cultural and community institution, often bridging the gap between formal 
 and informal education.  freeman will discuss the use of am in school 
 libraries.  use by students and teachers has revealed some broad 
 questions about the use of electronic resources, as well as definite 
 benefits gained by the nonscholar.  topics will include the problem of 
 grasping content and context in an electronic environment, the stumbling 
 blocks created by new technologies, and the unique skills and interests 
 awakened through use of electronic resources. 
  
 session ii 
  
 elli mylonas             the perseus project  interactive sources and 
                          studies in classical greece 
  
 the perseus project () has just released perseus ., the first publicly 
 available version of its hypertextual database of multimedia materials on 
 classical greece.  perseus is designed to be used by a wide audience, 
 comprised of readers at the student and scholar levels.  as such, it must 
 be able to locate information using different strategies, and it must 
 contain enough detail to serve the different needs of its users.  in 
 addition, it must be delivered so that it is affordable to its target 
 audience.  these problems and the solutions we chose are described in 
 mylonas, an interface to classical greek civilization, jasis , 
 march . 
  
 in order to achieve its objective, the project staff decided to make a 
 conscious separation between selecting and converting textual, database, 
 and image data on the one hand, and putting it into a delivery system on 
 the other.  that way, it is possible to create the electronic data 
 without thinking about the restrictions of the delivery system.  we have 
 made a great effort to choose systemindependent formats for our data, 
 and to put as much thought and work as possible into structuring it so 
 that the translation from paper to electronic form will enhance the value 
 of the data. a discussion of these solutions as of two years ago is in 
 elli mylonas, gregory crane, kenneth morrell, and d. neel smith, the 
 perseus project  data in the electronic age, in accessing antiquity  
 the computerization of classical databases, j. solomon and t. worthen 
 (eds.),  university of arizona press, in press. 
  
 much of the work on perseus is focused on collecting and converting the 
 data on which the project is based.  at the same time, it is necessary to 
 provide means of access to the information, in order to make it usable, 
 and them to investigate how it is used.  as we learn more about what 
 students and scholars from different backgrounds do with perseus, we can 
 adjust our data collection, and also modify the system to accommodate 
 them.  in creating a delivery system for general use, we have tried to 
 avoid favoring any one type of use by allowing multiple forms of access 
 to and navigation through the system. 
  
 the way text is handled exemplifies some of these principles.  all text 
 in perseus is tagged using sgml, following the guidelines of the text 
 encoding initiative (tei).  this markup is used to index the text, and 
 process it so that it can be imported into hypercard.  no sgml markup 
 remains in the text that reaches the user, because currently it would be 
 too expensive to create a system that acts on sgml in real time.  
 however, the regularity provided by sgml is essential for verifying the 
 content of the texts, and greatly speeds all the processing performed on 
 them.  the fact that the texts exist in sgml ensures that they will be 
 relatively easy to port to different hardware and software, and so will 
 outlast the current delivery platform.  finally, the sgml markup 
 incorporates existing canonical reference systems (chapter, verse, line, 
 etc.) indexing and navigation are based on these features.  this ensures 
 that the same canonical reference will always resolve to the same point 
 within a text, and that all versions of our texts, regardless of delivery 
 platform (even paper printouts) will function the same way. 
  
 in order to provide tools for users, the text is processed by a 
 morphological analyzer, and the results are stored in a database.  
 together with the index, the greekenglish lexicon, and the index of all 
 the english words in the definitions of the lexicon, the morphological 
 analyses comprise a set of linguistic tools that allow users of all 
 levels to work with the textual information, and to accomplish different 
 tasks.  for example, students who read no greek may explore a concept as 
 it appears in greek texts by using the englishgreek index, and then 
 looking up works in the texts and translations, or scholars may do 
 detailed morphological studies of word use by using the morphological 
 analyses of the texts.  because these tools were not designed for any one 
 use, the same tools and the same data can be used by both students and 
 scholars. 
  
 notes 
      ()  perseus is based at harvard university, with collaborators at 
      several other universities.  the project has been funded primarily 
      by the annenbergcpb project, as well as by harvard university, 
      apple computer, and others.  it is published by yale university 
      press.  perseus runs on macintosh computers, under the hypercard 
      program. 
  
 eric calaluca 
  
 chadwyckhealey embarked last year on two distinct yet related fulltext 
 humanities database projects. 
  
 the english poetry fulltext database and the patrologia latina database 
 represent new approaches to linguistic research resources.  the size and 
 complexity of the projects present problems for electronic publishers, 
 but surmountable ones if they remain abreast of the latest possibilities 
 in data capture and retrieval software techniques. 
  
 the issues which required address prior to the commencement of the 
 projects were legion 
  
      .   editorial selection (or exclusion) of materials in each 
           database 
  
      .   deciding whether or not to incorporate a normative encoding 
           structure into the databases 
                a.  if one is selected, should it be sgml 
                b.  if sgml, then the tei 
       
      .   deliver as cdrom, magnetic tape, or both 
  
      .   can one produce retrieval software advanced enough for the 
           postdoctoral linguist, yet accessible enough for unattended 
           general use  should one try 
  
      .   re fair and liberal networking policies, what are the risks to 
           an electronic publisher 
  
      .   how does the emergence of national and international education 
           networks affect the use and viability of research projects 
           requiring high investment  do the new european community 
           directives concerning database protection necessitate two 
           distinct publishing projects, one for north america and one for 
           overseas 
  
 from new notions of scholarly fair use to the future of optical media, 
 virtually every issue related to electronic publishing was aired.  the 
 result is two projects which have been constructed to provide the quality 
 research resources with the fewest encumbrances to use by teachers and 
 private scholars. 
  
 dorothy twohig 
  
 in spring  the editors of the papers of george washington, john 
 adams, thomas jefferson, james madison, and benjamin franklin were 
 approached by classics scholar david packard on behalf of the packard 
 humanities foundation with a proposal to produce a cdrom edition of the 
 complete papers of each of the founding fathers.  this electronic edition 
 will supplement the published volumes, making the documents widely 
 available to students and researchers at reasonable cost.  we estimate 
 that our cdrom edition of washingtons papers will be substantially 
 completed within the next two years and ready for publication.  within 
 the next ten years or so, similar cdrom editions of the franklin, adams, 
 jefferson, and madison papers also will be available.  at the library of 
 congresss session on technology, i would like to discuss not only the 
 experience of the washington papers in producing the cdrom edition, but 
 the impact technology has had on these major editorial projects.  
 already, we are editing our volumes with an eye to the material that will 
 be readily available in the cdrom edition.  the completed electronic 
 edition will provide immense possibilities for the searching of documents 
 for information in a way never possible before.  the kind of technical 
 innovations that are currently available and on the drawing board will 
 soon revolutionize historical research and the production of historical 
 documents.  unfortunately, much of this new technology is not being used 
 in the planning stages of historical projects, simply because many 
 historians are aware only in the vaguest way of its existence.  at least 
 two major new historical editing projects are considering microfilm 
 editions, simply because they are not aware of the possibilities of 
 electronic alternatives and the advantages of the new technology in terms 
 of flexibility and research potential compared to microfilm.  in fact, 
 too many of us in history and literature are still at the stage of 
 struggling with our pcs.  there are many historical editorial projects in 
 progress presently, and an equal number of literary projects.  while the 
 two fields have somewhat different approaches to textual editing, there 
 are ways in which electronic technology can be of service to both. 
  
 since few of the editors involved in the founding fathers cdrom editions 
 are technical experts in any sense, i hope to point out in my discussion 
 of our experience how many of these electronic innovations can be used 
 successfully by scholars who are novices in the world of new technology.  
 one of the major concerns of the sponsors of the multitude of new 
 scholarly editions is the limited audience reached by the published 
 volumes.  most of these editions are being published in small quantities 
 and the publishers price for them puts them out of the reach not only of 
 individual scholars but of most public libraries and all but the largest 
 educational institutions.  however, little attention is being given to 
 ways in which technology can bypass conventional publication to make 
 historical and literary documents more widely available. 
  
 what attracted us most to the cdrom edition of the papers of george 
 washington was the fact that david packards aim was to make a complete 
 edition of all of the , documents we have collected available in an 
 inexpensive format that would be placed in public libraries, small 
 colleges, and even high schools.  this would provide an audience far 
 beyond our present ,copy,  published edition.  since the cdrom 
 edition will carry none of the explanatory annotation that appears in the 
 published volumes, we also feel that the use of the cdrom will lead many 
 researchers to seek out the published volumes. 
  
 in addition to ignorance of new technical advances, i have found that too 
 many editorsand historians and literary scholarsare resistant and 
 even hostile to suggestions that electronic technology may enhance their 
 work.  i intend to discuss some of the arguments traditionalists are 
 advancing to resist technology, ranging from distrust of the speed with 
 which it changes (we are already wondering what is out there that is 
 better than cdrom) to suspicion of the technical language used to 
 describe electronic developments. 
  
 maria lebron 
  
 the online journal of current clinical trials, a joint venture of the 
 american association for the advancement of science (aaas) and the online 
 computer library center, inc. (oclc), is the first peerreviewed journal 
 to provide full text, tabular material, and line illustrations on line.  
 this presentation will discuss the genesis and startup period of the 
 journal.  topics of discussion will include historical overview, 
 daytoday management of the editorial peer review, and manuscript 
 tagging and publication.  a demonstration of the journal and its features 
 will accompany the presentation. 
  
 lynne personius 
  
 cornell university library, cornell information technologies, and xerox 
 corporation, with the support of the commission on preservation and 
 access, and sun microsystems, inc., have been collaborating in a project 
 to test a prototype system for recording brittle books as digital images 
 and producing, on demand, highquality archival paper replacements.  the 
 project goes beyond that, however, to investigate some of the issues 
 surrounding scanning, storing, retrieving, and providing access to 
 digital images in a network environment. 
  
 the joint study in digital preservation began in january .  xerox 
 provided the college library access and storage system (class) software, 
 a prototype dotsperinch (dpi) scanner, and the hardware necessary 
 to support network printing on the docutech printer housed in cornells 
 computing and communications center (ccc). 
  
 the cornell staff using the hardware and software became an integral part 
 of the development and testing process for enhancements to the class 
 software system.  the collaborative nature of this relationship is 
 resulting in a system that is specifically tailored to the preservation 
 application. 
  
 a digital library of , volumes (or approximately , images) has 
 been created and is stored on an optical jukebox that resides in ccc.  
 the library includes a collection of select mathematics monographs that 
 provides mathematics faculty with an opportunity to use the electronic 
 library.  the remaining volumes were chosen for the library to test the 
 various capabilities of the scanning system. 
  
 one project objective is to provide users of the cornell library and the 
 library staff with the ability to request facsimiles of digitized images 
 or to retrieve the actual electronic image for browsing.  a prototype 
 viewing workstation has been created by xerox, with input into the design 
 by a committee of cornell librarians and computer professionals.  this 
 will allow us to experiment with patron access to the images that make up 
 the digital library.  the viewing station provides search, retrieval, and 
 (ultimately) printing functions with enhancements to facilitate 
 navigation through multiple documents. 
  
 cornell currently is working to extend access to the digital library to 
 readers using workstations from their offices.  this year is devoted to 
 the development of a network resident image conversion and delivery 
 server, and client software that will support readers who use apple 
 macintosh computers, ibm windows platforms, and sun workstations.  
 equipment for this development was provided by sun microsystems with 
 support from the commission on preservation and access. 
  
 during the showandtell session of the workshop on electronic texts, a 
 prototype view station will be demonstrated.  in addition, a display of 
 original library books that have been digitized will be available for 
 review with associated printed copies for comparison.  the fifteenminute 
 overview of the project will include a slide presentation that 
 constitutes a tour of the preservation digitizing process. 
  
 the final networkconnected version of the viewing station will provide 
 library users with another mechanism for accessing the digital library, 
 and will also provide the capability of viewing images directly.  this 
 will not require special software, although a powerful computer with good 
 graphics will be needed. 
  
 the joint study in digital preservation has generated a great deal of 
 interest in the library community.  unfortunately, or perhaps 
 fortunately, this project serves to raise a vast number of other issues 
 surrounding the use of digital technology for the preservation and use of 
 deteriorating library materials, which subsequent projects will need to 
 examine.  much work remains. 
  
 session iii 
  
 howard besser                      networking multimedia databases 
  
 what do we have to consider in building and distributing databases of 
 visual materials in a multiuser environment  this presentation examines 
 a variety of concerns that need to be addressed before a multimedia 
 database can be set up in a networked environment. 
  
 in the past it has not been feasible to implement databases of visual 
 materials in shareduser environments because of technological barriers.  
 each of the two basic models for multiuser multimedia databases has 
 posed its own problem.  the analog multimedia storage model (represented 
 by project athenas parallel analog and digital networks) has required an 
 incredibly complex (and expensive) infrastructure.  the economies of 
 scale that make multiuser setups cheaper per user served do not operate 
 in an environment that requires a computer workstation, videodisc player, 
 and two display devices for each user. 
  
 the digital multimedia storage model has required vast amounts of storage 
 space (as much as one gigabyte per thirty still images).  in the past the 
 cost of such a large amount of storage space made this model a 
 prohibitive choice as well.  but plunging storage costs are finally 
 making this second alternative viable. 
  
 if storage no longer poses such an impediment, what do we need to 
 consider in building digitally stored multiuser databases of visual 
 materials  this presentation will examine the networking and 
 telecommunication constraints that must be overcome before such databases 
 can become commonplace and useful to a large number of people. 
  
 the key problem is the vast size of multimedia documents, and how this 
 affects not only storage but telecommunications transmission time.  
 anything slower than t speed is impractical for files of  megabyte or 
 larger (which is likely to be small for a multimedia document).  for 
 instance, even on a  kb line it would take three minutes to transfer a 
 megabyte file.  and these figures assume ideal circumstances, and do 
 not take into consideration other users contending for network bandwidth, 
 disk access time, or the time needed for remote display.  current common 
 telephone transmission rates would be completely impractical few users 
 would be willing to wait the hour necessary to transmit a single image at 
  baud. 
  
 this necessitates compression, which itself raises a number of other 
 issues.  in order to decrease file sizes significantly, we must employ 
 lossy compression algorithms.  but how much quality can we afford to 
 lose  to date there has been only one significant study done of 
 imagequality needs for a particular user group, and this study did not 
 look at loss resulting from compression.  only after identifying 
 imagequality needs can we begin to address storage and network bandwidth 
 needs. 
  
 experience with xwindowsbased applications (such as imagequery, the 
 university of california at berkeley image database) demonstrates the 
 utility of a clientserver topology, but also points to the limitation of 
 current software for a distributed environment.  for example, 
 applications like imagequery can incorporate compression, but current x 
 implementations do not permit decompression at the end users 
 workstation.  such decompression at the host computer alleviates storage 
 capacity problems while doing nothing to address problems of 
 telecommunications bandwidth. 
  
 we need to examine the effects on network throughput of moving 
 multimedia documents around on a network.  we need to examine various 
 topologies that will help us avoid bottlenecks around servers and 
 gateways.  experience with applications such as these raise still broader 
 questions. how closely is the multimedia document tied to the software 
 for viewing it  can it be accessed and viewed from other applications  
 experience with the marc format (and more recently with the z. 
 protocols) shows how useful it can be to store documents in a form in 
 which they can be accessed by a variety of application software. 
  
 finally, from an intellectualaccess standpoint, we need to address the 
 issue of providing access to these multimedia documents in 
 interdisciplinary environments.  we need to examine terminology and 
 indexing strategies that will allow us to provide access to this material 
 in a crossdisciplinary way. 
  
 ronald larsen            directions in highperformance networking for 
                          libraries 
  
 the pace at which computing technology has advanced over the past forty 
 years shows no sign of abating.  roughly speaking, each fiveyear period 
 has yielded an orderofmagnitude improvement in price and performance of 
 computing equipment.  no fundamental hurdles are likely to prevent this 
 pace from continuing for at least the next decade.  it is only in the 
 past five years, though, that computing has become ubiquitous in 
 libraries, affecting all staff and patrons, directly or indirectly. 
  
 during these same five years, communications rates on the internet, the 
 principal academic computing network, have grown from  kbps to . 
 mbps, and the nsfnet backbone is now running  mbps.  over the next five 
 years, communication rates on the backbone are expected to exceed  gbps.  
 growth in both the population of network users and the volume of network 
 traffic  has continued to grow geometrically, at rates approaching  
 percent per month.  this flood of capacity and use, likened by some to 
 drinking from a firehose,  creates immense opportunities and challenges 
 for libraries.  libraries must anticipate the future implications of this 
 technology, participate in its development, and deploy it to ensure 
 access to the worlds information resources. 
  
 the infrastructure for the information age is being put in place.  
 libraries face strategic decisions about their role in the development, 
 deployment, and use of this infrastructure.  the emerging infrastructure 
 is much more than computers and communication lines.  it is more than the 
 ability to compute at a remote site, send electronic mail to a peer 
 across the country, or move a file from one library to another.  the next 
 five years will witness substantial development of the information 
 infrastructure of the network. 
  
 in order to provide appropriate leadership, library professionals must 
 have a fundamental understanding of and appreciation for computer 
 networking, from local area networks to the national research and 
 education network (nren).  this presentation addresses these 
 fundamentals, and how they relate to libraries today and in the near 
 future. 
  
 edwin brownrigg               electronic library visions and realities 
  
 the electronic library has been a vision desired by manyand rejected by 
 somesince vannevar bush coined the term memex to describe an automated, 
 intelligent, personal information system.  variations on this vision have 
 included ted nelsons xanadau, alan kays dynabook, and lancasters 
 paperless library, with the most recent incarnation being the 
 knowledge navigator described by john scully of apple.  but the reality 
 of library service has been less visionary and the leap to the electronic 
 library has eluded universities, publishers, and information technology 
 files. 
  
 the memex research institute (memri), an independent, nonprofit research 
 and development organization, has created an electronic library program 
 of shared research and development in order to make the collective vision 
 more concrete.  the program is working toward the creation of large, 
 indexed publicly available electronic image collections of published 
 documents in academic, special, and public libraries.  this strategic 
 plan is the result of the first stage of the program, which has been an 
 investigation of the information technologies available to support such 
 an effort, the economic parameters of electronic service compared to 
 traditional library operations, and the business and political factors 
 affecting the shift from print distribution to electronic networked 
 access. 
  
 the strategic plan envisions a combination of publicly searchable access 
 databases, image (and text) document collections stored on network file 
 servers, local and remote network access, and an intellectual property 
 managementcontrol system.  this combination of technology and 
 information content is defined in this plan as an elibrary or elibrary 
 collection.  some participating sponsors are already developing projects 
 based on memris recommended directions. 
  
 the elibrary strategy projected in this plan is a visionary one that can 
 enable major changes and improvements in academic, public, and special 
 library service.  this vision is, though, one that can be realized with 
 todays technology.  at the same time, it will challenge the political 
 and social structure within which libraries operate  in academic 
 libraries, the traditional emphasis on local collections, extending to 
 accreditation issues in public libraries, the potential of electronic 
 branch and central libraries fully available to the public and for 
 special libraries, new opportunities for shared collections and networks. 
  
 the environment in which this strategic plan has been developed is, at 
 the moment, dominated by a sense of library limits.  the continued 
 expansion and rapid growth of local academic library collections is now 
 clearly at an end.  corporate libraries, and even law libraries, are 
 faced with operating within a difficult economic climate, as well as with 
 very active competition from commercial information sources.  for 
 example, public libraries may be seen as a desirable but not critical 
 municipal service in a time when the budgets of safety and health 
 agencies are being cut back. 
  
 further, libraries in general have a very high labortocost ratio in 
 their budgets, and labor costs are still increasing, notwithstanding 
 automation investments.  it is difficult for libraries to obtain capital, 
 startup, or seed funding for innovative activities, and those 
 technologyintensive initiatives that offer the potential of decreased 
 labor costs can provoke the opposition of library staff. 
  
 however, libraries have achieved some considerable successes in the past 
 two decades by improving both their service and their credibility within 
 their organizationsand these positive changes have been accomplished 
 mostly with judicious use of information technologies.  the advances in 
 computing and information technology have been wellchronicled  the 
 continuing precipitous drop in computing costs, the growth of the 
 internet and private networks, and the explosive increase in publicly 
 available information databases. 
  
 for example, oclc has become one of the largest computer network 
 organizations in the world by creating a cooperative cataloging network 
 of more than , libraries worldwide.  online public access catalogs 
 now serve millions of users on more than , dedicated terminals in 
 the united states alone.  the university of california melvyl online 
 catalog system has now expanded into an index database reference service 
 and supports more than six million searches a year.  and, libraries have 
 become the largest group of customers of cdrom publishing technology 
 more than , optical media publications such as those offered by 
 infotrac and silver platter are subscribed to by u.s. libraries. 
  
 this march of technology continues and in the next decade will result in 
 further innovations that are extremely difficult to predict.  what is 
 clear is that libraries can now go beyond automation of their order files 
 and catalogs to automation of their collections themselvesand it is 
 possible to circumvent the fiscal limitations that appear to obtain 
 today. 
  
 this electronic library strategic plan recommends a paradigm shift in 
 library service, and demonstrates the steps necessary to provide improved 
 library services with limited capacities and operating investments. 
  
 session iva 
  
 anne kenney 
  
 the cornellxerox joint study in digital preservation resulted in the 
 recording of , brittle books as dpi digital images and the 
 production, on demand, of highquality and archivally sound paper 
 replacements.  the project, which was supported by the commission on 
 preservation and access, also investigated some of the issues surrounding 
 scanning, storing, retrieving, and providing access to digital images in 
 a network environment. 
  
 anne kenney will focus on some of the issues surrounding direct scanning 
 as identified in the cornell xerox project.  among those to be discussed 
 are  image versus text capture indexing and access imagecapture 
 capabilities a comparison to photocopy and microfilm production and 
 cost analysis storage formats, protocols, and standards and the use of 
 this scanning technology for preservation purposes. 
  
 the dpi digital images produced in the cornell xerox project proved 
 highly acceptable for creating paper replacements of deteriorating 
 originals.  the , scanned volumes provided an array of imagecapture 
 challenges that are common to nineteenthcentury printing techniques and 
 embrittled material, and that defy the use of textconversion processes.  
 these challenges include diminished contrast between text and background, 
 fragile and deteriorated pages, uneven printing, elaborate type faces, 
 faint and bold text adjacency, handwritten text and annotations, nonroman 
 languages, and a proliferation of illustrated material embedded in text.  
 the latter category included highfrequency and lowfrequency halftones, 
 continuous tone photographs, intricate mathematical drawings, maps, 
 etchings, reversepolarity drawings, and engravings. 
  
 the xerox prototype scanning system provided a number of important 
 features for capturing this diverse material.  technicians used multiple 
 threshold settings, filters, line art and halftone definitions, 
 autosegmentation, windowing, and softwareediting programs to optimize 
 image capture.  at the same time, this project focused on production.  
 the goal was to make scanning as affordable and acceptable as 
 photocopying and microfilming for preservation reformatting.  a 
 timeandcost study conducted during the last three months of this 
 project confirmed the economic viability of digital scanning, and these 
 findings will be discussed here. 
  
 from the outset, the cornell xerox project was predicated on the use of 
 nonproprietary standards and the use of common protocols when standards 
 did not exist.  digital files were created as tiff images which were 
 compressed prior to storage using group  ccitt compression.  the xerox 
 software is ms dos based and utilizes offthe shelf programs such as 
 microsoft windows and wang image wizard.  the digital library is designed 
 to be hardwareindependent and to provide interchangeability with other 
 institutions through network connections.  access to the digital files 
 themselves is twotiered  bibliographic records for the computer files 
 are created in rlin and cornells local system and access into the actual 
 digital images comprising a book is provided through a document control 
 structure and a networked image fileserver, both of which will be 
 described. 
  
 the presentation will conclude with a discussion of some of the issues 
 surrounding the use of this technology as a preservation tool (storage, 
 refreshing, backup). 
  
 pamela andre and judith zidar 
  
 the national agricultural library (nal) has had extensive experience with 
 raster scanning of printed materials.  since , the library has 
 participated in the national agricultural text digitizing project (natdp) 
 a cooperative effort between nal and fortyfive land grant university 
 libraries.  an overview of the project will be presented, giving its 
 history and nals strategy for the future. 
  
 an indepth discussion of natdp will follow, including a description of 
 the scanning process, from the gathering of the printed materials to the 
 archiving of the electronic pages.  the type of equipment required for a 
 standalone scanning workstation and the importance of file management 
 software will be discussed.  issues concerning the images themselves will 
 be addressed briefly, such as image format black and white versus color 
 gray scale versus dithering and resolution. 
  
 also described will be a study currently in progress by nal to evaluate 
 the usefulness of converting microfilm to electronic images in order to 
 improve access.  with the cooperation of tuskegee university, nal has 
 selected three reels of microfilm from a collection of sixtyseven reels 
 containing the papers, letters, and drawings of george washington carver.  
 the three reels were converted into , electronic images using a 
 specialized microfilm scanner.  the selection, filming, and indexing of 
 this material will be discussed. 
  
 donald waters 
  
 project open book, the yale university librarys effort to convert , 
  books from microfilm to digital imagery, is currently in an advanced 
 state of planning and organization.  the yale library has selected a 
 major vendor to serve as a partner in the project and as systems 
 integrator.  in its proposal, the successful vendor helped isolate areas 
 of risk and uncertainty as well as key issues to be addressed during the 
 life of the project.  the yale library is now poised to decide what 
 material it will convert to digital image form and to seek funding, 
 initially for the first phase and then for the entire project. 
  
 the proposal that yale accepted for the implementation of project open 
 book will provide at the end of three phases a conversion subsystem, 
 browsing stations distributed on the campus network within the yale 
 library, a subsystem for storing , books at  and  dots per 
 inch, and network access to the image printers.  pricing for the system 
 implementation assumes the existence of yales campus ethernet network 
 and its highspeed image printers, and includes other requisite hardware 
 and software, as well as system integration services.  proposed operating 
 costs include hardware and software maintenance, but do not include 
 estimates for the facilities management of the storage devices and image 
 servers. 
  
 yale selected its vendor partner in a formal process, partly funded by 
 the commission for preservation and access.  following a request for 
 proposal, the yale library selected two vendors as finalists to work with 
 yale staff to generate a detailed analysis of requirements for project 
 open book.  each vendor used the results of the requirements analysis to 
 generate and submit a formal proposal for the entire project.  this 
 competitive process not only enabled the yale library to select its 
 primary vendor partner but also revealed much about the state of the 
 imaging industry, about the varying, corporate commitments to the markets 
 for imaging technology, and about the varying organizational dynamics 
 through which major companies are responding to and seeking to develop 
 these markets. 
  
 project open book is focused specifically on the conversion of images 
 from microfilm to digital form.  the technology for scanning microfilm is 
 readily available but is changing rapidly.  in its project requirements, 
 the yale library emphasized features of the technology that affect the 
 technical quality of digital image production and the costs of creating 
 and storing the image library  what levels of digital resolution can be 
 achieved by scanning microfilm  how does variation in the quality of 
 microfilm, particularly in film produced to preservation standards, 
 affect the quality of the digital images  what technologies can an 
 operator effectively and economically apply when scanning film to 
 separate twoup images and to control for and correct image 
 imperfections  how can quality control best be integrated into 
 digitizing work flow that includes document indexing and storage 
  
 the actual and expected uses of digital imagesstorage, browsing, 
 printing, and ocrhelp determine the standards for measuring their 
 quality.  browsing is especially important, but the facilities available 
 for readers to browse image documents is perhaps the weakest aspect of 
 imaging technology and most in need of development.  as it defined its 
 requirements, the yale library concentrated on some fundamental aspects 
 of usability for image documents  does the system have sufficient 
 flexibility to handle the full range of document types, including 
 monographs, multipart and multivolume sets, and serials, as well as 
 manuscript collections  what conventions are necessary to identify a 
 document uniquely for storage and retrieval  where is the database of 
 record for storing bibliographic information about the image document  
 how are basic internal structures of documents, such as pagination, made 
 accessible to the reader  how are the image documents physically 
 presented on the screen to the reader 
  
 the yale library designed project open book on the assumption that 
 microfilm is more than adequate as a medium for preserving the content of 
 deteriorated library materials.  as planning in the project has advanced, 
 it is increasingly clear that the challenge of digital image technology 
 and the key to the success of efforts like project open book is to 
 provide a means of both preserving and improving access to those 
 deteriorated materials. 
  
 session ivb 
  
 george thoma 
  
 in the use of electronic imaging for document preservation, there are 
 several issues to consider, such as  ensuring adequate image quality, 
 maintaining substantial conversion rates (throughput), providing unique 
 identification for automated access and retrieval, and accommodating 
 bound volumes and fragile material. 
  
 to maintain high image quality, image processing functions are required 
 to correct the deficiencies in the scanned image.  some commercially 
 available systems include these functions, while some do not.  the 
 scanned raw image must be processed to correct contrast deficiencies 
 both poor overall contrast resulting from light print andor dark 
 background, and variable contrast resulting from stains and 
 bleedthrough.  furthermore, the scan density must be adequate to allow 
 legibility of print and sufficient fidelity in the pseudohalftoned gray 
 material.  borders or pageedge effects must be removed for both 
 compactibility and aesthetics.  page skew must be corrected for aesthetic 
 reasons and to enable accurate character recognition if desired.  
 compound images consisting of both twotoned text and grayscale 
 illustrations must be processed appropriately to retain the quality of 
 each. 
  
 session ivc 
  
 jean baronas 
  
 standards publications being developed by scientists, engineers, and 
 business managers in association for information and image management 
 (aiim) standards committees can be applied to electronic image management 
 (eim) processes including  document (image) transfer, retrieval and 
 evaluation optical disk and document scanning and document design and 
 conversion.  when combined with eim system planning and operations, 
 standards can assist in generating image databases that are 
 interchangeable among a variety of systems.  the applications of 
 different approaches for imagetagging, indexing, compression, and 
 transfer often cause uncertainty concerning eim system compatibility, 
 calibration, performance, and upward compatibility, until standard 
 implementation parameters are established.  the aiim standards that are 
 being developed for these applications can be used to decrease the 
 uncertainty, successfully integrate imaging processes, and promote open 
 systems.  aiim is an accredited american national standards institute 
 (ansi) standards developer with more than twenty committees comprised of 
  volunteers representing users, vendors, and manufacturers.  the 
 standards publications that are developed in these committees have 
 national acceptance and provide the basis for international harmonization 
 in the development of new international organization for standardization 
 (iso) standards. 
  
 this presentation describes the development of aiims eim standards and a 
 new effort at aiim, a database on standards projects in a wide framework 
 of imaging industries including capture, recording, processing, 
 duplication, distribution, display, evaluation, and preservation.  the 
 aiim imagery database will cover imaging standards being developed by 
 many organizations in many different countries.  it will contain 
 standards publications dates, origins, related national and 
 international projects, status, key words, and abstracts.  the ansi image 
 technology standards board requested that such a database be established, 
 as did the isointernational electrotechnical commission joint task force 
 on imagery.  aiim will take on the leadership role for the database and 
 coordinate its development with several standards developers. 
  
 patricia battin 
  
      characteristics of standards for digital imagery 
  
            nature of digital technology implies continuing volatility. 
  
            precipitous standardsetting not possible and probably not 
           desirable. 
  
            standards are a complex issue involving the medium, the 
           hardware, the software, and the technical capacity for 
           reproductive fidelity and clarity. 
  
            the prognosis for reliable archival standards (as defined by 
           librarians) in the foreseeable future is poor. 
  
      significant potential and attractiveness of digital technology as a 
      preservation medium and access mechanism. 
  
      productive use of digital imagery for preservation requires a 
      reconceptualizing of preservation principles in a volatile, 
      standardless world. 
  
      concept of managing continuing access in the digital environment 
      rather than focusing on the permanence of the medium and longterm 
      archival standards developed for the analog world. 
  
      transition period  how long and what to do 
  
             redefine archival. 
  
             remove the burden of archival copy from paper artifacts. 
  
             use digital technology for storage, develop management 
           strategies for refreshing medium, hardware and software. 
  
             create acidfree paper copies for transition period backup 
           until we develop reliable procedures for ensuring continuing 
           access to digital files. 
  
 session ivd 
  
 stuart weibel            the role of sgml markup in the core project () 
  
 the emergence of highspeed telecommunications networks as a basic 
 feature of the scholarly workplace is driving the demand for electronic 
 document delivery.  three distinct categories of electronic 
 publishingrepublishing are necessary to support access demands in this 
 emerging environment 
  
      .)  conversion of paper or microfilm archives to electronic format 
      .)  conversion of electronic files to formats tailored to 
           electronic retrieval and display 
      .)  primary electronic publishing (materials for which the 
           electronic version is the primary format) 
  
 oclc has experimental or product development activities in each of these 
 areas.  among the challenges that lie ahead is the integration of these 
 three types of information stores in coherent distributed systems. 
  
 the core (chemistry online retrieval experiment) project is a model for 
 the conversion of large text and graphics collections for which 
 electronic typesetting files are available (category ).  the american 
 chemical society has made available computer typography files dating from 
  for its twenty journals.  this collection of some  journalyears 
 is being converted to an electronic format that will be accessible 
 through several enduser applications. 
  
 the use of standard generalized markup language (sgml) offers the means 
 to capture the structural richness of the original articles in a way that 
 will support a variety of retrieval, navigation, and display options 
 necessary to navigate effectively in very large text databases. 
  
 an sgml document consists of text that is marked up with descriptive tags 
 that specify the function of a given element within the document.  as a 
 formal language construct, an sgml document can be parsed against a 
 documenttype definition (dtd) that unambiguously defines what elements 
 are allowed and where in the document they can (or must) occur.  this 
 formalized map of article structure allows the user interface design to 
 be uncoupled from the underlying database system, an important step 
 toward interoperability.  demonstration of this separability is a part of 
 the core project, wherein user interface designs born of very different 
 philosophies will access the same database. 
  
 notes 
      ()  the core project is a collaboration among cornell universitys 
      mann library, bell communications research (bellcore), the american 
      chemical society (acs), the chemical abstracts service (cas), and 
      oclc. 
  
 michael lesk                  the core electronic chemistry library 
  
 a major online file of chemical journal literature complete with 
 graphics is being developed to test the usability of fully electronic 
 access to documents, as a joint project of cornell university, the 
 american chemical society, the chemical abstracts service, oclc, and 
 bellcore (with additional support from sun microsystems, springerverlag, 
 digitai equipment corporation, sony corporation of america, and apple 
 computers).  our file contains the american chemical societys online 
 journals, supplemented with the graphics from the paper publication.  the 
 indexing of the articles from chemical abstracts documents is available 
 in both image and text format, and several different interfaces can be 
 used.  our goals are () to assess the effectiveness and acceptability of 
 electronic access to primary journals as compared with paper, and () to 
 identify the most desirable functions of the user interface to an 
 electronic system of journals, including in particular a comparison of 
 pageimage display with ascii display interfaces.  early experiments with 
 chemistry students on a variety of tasks suggest that searching tasks are 
 completed much faster with any electronic system than with paper, but 
 that for reading all versions of the articles are roughly equivalent. 
  
 pamela andre and judith zidar 
  
 text conversion is far more expensive and timeconsuming than image 
 capture alone.  nals experience with optical character recognition (ocr) 
 will be related and compared with the experience of having text rekeyed.  
 what factors affect ocr accuracy  how accurate does full text have to be 
 in order to be useful  how do different users react to imperfect text  
 these are questions that will be explored.  for many, a service bureau 
 may be a better solution than performing the work inhouse this will also 
 be discussed. 
  
 session vi 
  
 marybeth peters 
  
 copyright law protects creative works.  protection granted by the law to 
 authors and disseminators of works includes the right to do or authorize 
 the following  reproduce the work, prepare derivative works, distribute 
 the work to the public, and publicly perform or display the work.  in 
 addition, copyright owners of sound recordings and computer programs have 
 the right to control rental of their works.  these rights are not 
 unlimited there are a number of exceptions and limitations. 
  
 an electronic environment places strains on the copyright system.  
 copyright owners want to control uses of their work and be paid for any 
 use the public wants quick and easy access at little or no cost.  the 
 marketplace is working in this area.  contracts, guidelines on electronic 
 use, and collective licensing are in use and being refined. 
  
 issues concerning the ability to change works without detection are more 
 difficult to deal with.  questions concerning the integrity of the work 
 and the status of the changed version under the copyright law are to be 
 addressed.  these are public policy issues which require informed 
 dialogue. 
  
  
                                   
  
  
                 appendix iii  directory of participants 
                           
  
 presenters 
  
      pamela q.j. andre 
      associate director, automation 
      national agricultural library 
       baltimore boulevard 
      beltsville, md  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  internet  pandreasrr.arsusda.gov 
  
      jean baronas, senior manager 
      department of standards and technology 
      association for information and image management (aiim) 
       wayne avenue, suite  
      silver spring, md  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
       
      patricia battin, president 
      the commission on preservation and access 
       th street, n.w. 
      suite  
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  cpagwuvm.bitnet 
  
      howard besser 
      centre canadien darchitecture 
      (canadian center for architecture) 
      , rue baile 
      montreal, quebec hh s 
      canada 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  howardlis.pitt.edu 
  
      edwin b. brownrigg, executive director 
      memex research institute 
       bonita avenue 
      roseville, ca  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  bitnet  memexcalstate. 
  
      eric m. calaluca, vice president 
      chadwyckhealey, inc. 
       king street 
      alexandria, va l 
      phone  () l 
      fax  ()  
  
      james daly 
       deepwood road 
      baltimore, md  
      phone  ()  
  
      ricky erway, associate coordinator 
      american memory 
      library of congress 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      carl fleischhauer, coordinator 
      american memory 
      library of congress 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      joanne freeman 
       jefferson park avenue, no.  
      charlottesville, va   
       
      prosser gifford 
      director for scholarly programs 
      library of congress 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  pgifseq.loc.gov 
  
      jacqueline hess, director 
      national demonstration laboratory 
        for interactive information technologies 
      library of congress 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
       
      susan hockey, director 
      center for electronic texts in the humanities (ceth) 
      alexander library 
      rutgers university 
       college avenue 
      new brunswick, nj  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  hockeyzodiac.rutgers.edu 
  
      william l. hooton, vice president 
      business  technical development 
        imaging  information systems group 
      inet 
       rockledge drive, suite  
      bethesda, md l 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      anne r. kenney, associate director 
      department of preservation and conservation 
       olin library 
      cornell university 
      ithaca, ny  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  lydycornella.bitnet 
  
      ronald l. larsen 
      associate director for information technology 
      university of maryland at college park 
      room b, mckeldin library 
      college park, md  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  rlarsenlibr.umd.edu 
  
      maria l. lebron, managing editor 
      the online journal of current clinical trials 
      l h street, n.w. 
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  pubsaaasgwuvm.bitnet 
  
      michael lesk, executive director 
      computer science research 
      bell communications research, inc. 
      rm a 
       south street 
      morristown, nj ll      
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  leskbellcore.com (internet) or bellcorelesk (uucp) 
  
      clifford a. lynch 
      director, library automation 
      university of california, 
         office of the president 
       lakeside drive, th floor 
      oakland, ca  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  caluruccmvsa 
  
      avra michelson 
      national archives and records administration 
      nsz rm. n 
      th  pennsylvania, n.w. 
      washington, d.c.  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  tmicu.nih.gov 
       
      elli mylonas, managing editor 
      perseus project 
      department of the classics 
      harvard university 
       boylston hall 
      cambridge, ma  
      phone  () , ()  (direct) 
      fax  ()  
      email  elliikaros.harvard.edu or elliwjh.harvard.edu 
  
      david woodley packard 
      packard humanities institute 
       second street, suite  
      los altos, ca  
      phone  ()  (phi) 
      fax  ()  
  
      lynne k. personius, assistant director 
      cornell information technologies for 
       scholarly information sources 
       olin library 
      cornell university 
      ithaca, ny  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  jrncornellc.bitnet 
  
      marybeth peters 
      policy planning adviser to the 
        register of copyrights 
      library of congress 
      office lm  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      c. michael sperbergmcqueen 
      editor, text encoding initiative 
      computer center (mc ) 
      university of illinois at chicago 
      box  
      chicago, il  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  uuicvm..cc.uic.edu or uuicvm.bitnet 
  
      george r. thoma, chief 
      communications engineering branch 
      national library of medicine 
       rockville pike 
      bethesda, md  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  thomalhc.nlm.nih.gov 
  
      dorothy twohig, editor 
      the papers of george washington 
       alderman library 
      university of virginia 
      charlottesville, va  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      susan h. veccia, team leader 
      american memory, user evaluation 
      library of congress 
      american memory evaluation project 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  svecseq.loc.gov 
  
      donald j. waters, head 
      systems office 
      yale university library 
      new haven, ct  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  dwatersyalevm.bitnet or dwatersyalevm.ycc.yale.edu 
  
      stuart weibel, senior research scientist 
      oclc 
       frantz road 
      dublin, oh  
      phone  () l 
      fax  ()  
      email  internet  stursch.oclc.org 
  
      robert g. zich 
      special assistant to the associate librarian 
        for special projects 
      library of congress 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  rzicseq.loc.gov 
  
      judith a. zidar, coordinator 
      national agricultural text digitizing program 
      information systems division 
      national agricultural library 
       baltimore boulevard 
      beltsville, md  
      phone  ()  or  
      fax  ()  
      email  internet  jzidarasrr.arsusda.gov 
  
  
 observers 
  
      helen aguera, program officer 
      division of research 
      room  
      national endowment for the humanities 
       pennsylvania avenue, n.w. 
      washington, d.c.  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      m. ellyn blanton, deputy director 
      national demonstration laboratory 
        for interactive information technologies 
      library of congress 
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      charles m. dollar 
      national archives and records administration 
      nsz rm. n 
      th  pennsylvania, n.w. 
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      jeffrey field, deputy to the director 
      division of preservation and access 
      room  
      national endowment for the humanities 
       pennsylvania avenue, n.w. 
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
      lorrin garson 
      american chemical society 
      research and development department 
       th street, n.w. 
      washington, d.c.  
      phone  ()  
      fax  email  internet  lrgacs.org 
  
      william m. holmes, jr. 
      national archives and records administration 
      nsz rm. n 
      th  pennsylvania, n.w. 
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  wholmesamerican.edu 
  
      sperling martin 
      information resource management 
       doolittle street 
      gaithersburg, md  
      phone  ()  
  
      michael neuman, director 
      the center for text and technology 
      academic computing center 
       reiss science building 
      georgetown university 
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  neumanguvax.bitnet, neumanguvax.georgetown.edu 
  
      barbara paulson, program officer 
      division of preservation and access 
      room  
      national endowment for the humanities 
       pennsylvania avenue, n.w. 
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
       
      allen h. renear 
      senior academic planning analyst 
      brown university computing and information services 
       waterman street 
      campus box  
      providence, r.i.  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
      email  bitnet  allenbrownvm or            
      internet  allenbrownvm.brown.edu 
  
      susan m. severtson, president 
      chadwyckhealey, inc. 
       king street 
      alexandria, va l 
      phone  () l 
      fax  ()       
  
      frank withrow 
      u.s. department of education 
       new jersey avenue, n.w. 
      washington, dc  
      phone  ()  
      fax  ()  
  
  
 (lc staff) 
       
      linda l. arret 
      machinereadable collections reading room lj  
      ()  
  
      john d. byrum, jr. 
      descriptive cataloging division lm  
      ()  
  
      mary jane cavallo 
      science and technology division la  
      ()  
  
      susan thea david 
      congressional research service lm  
      ()  
  
      robert dierker 
      senior adviser for multimedia activities lm  
      ()  
  
      william w. ellis 
      associate librarian for science and technology lm  
      ()  
  
      ronald gephart 
      manuscript division lm  
      ()  
  
      james graber 
      information technology services lm g 
      ()  
  
      rich greenfield 
      american memory lm  
      ()  
  
      rebecca guenther 
      network development lm  
      ()  
  
      kenneth e. harris 
      preservation lm g 
      ()  
  
      staley hitchcock 
      manuscript division lm  
      ()  
  
      bohdan kantor 
      office of special projects lm  
      ()  
  
      john w. kimball, jr 
      machinereadable collections reading room lj  
      ()  
  
      basil manns 
      information technology services lm g 
      ()  
  
      sally hart mccallum 
      network development lm  
      ()  
  
      dana j. pratt 
      publishing office lm  
      ()  
  
      jane riefenhauser 
      american memory lm  
      ()  
  
      william z. schenck 
      collections development lm  
      ()  
  
      chandru j. shahani 
      preservation research and testing office (rt) lm g 
      ()  
  
      william j. sittig 
      collections development lm  
      ()  
  
      paul smith 
      manuscript division lm  
      ()  
  
      james l. stevens 
      information technology services lm g 
      ()  
  
      karen stuart 
      manuscript division lm  
      ()  
  
      tamara swora 
      preservation microfilming office lm g 
      ()  
  
      sarah thomas 
      collections cataloging lm  
      ()  
  
  
                                    end 
        
  
 note  this file has been edited for use on computer networks.  this 
 editing required the removal of diacritics, underlining, and fonts such 
 as italics and bold.   
  
 kde  
  
 a few of the italics (when used for emphasis) were replaced by caps mh 
  
 end of the project gutenberg etext of loc workshop on electronic etexts 
  
  
 
